Even though we tell stories every day at school, over the dinner table, and on the phone, being asked to write a story down on paper can feel overwhelming . We may suddenly feel that what we have to say is not interesting or important enough to share. But a story doesn’t have to be as dramatic as a Hollywood movie to be worth telling. Everyday life is full of valuable stories. Joe Lambert of the Center for Digital Storytelling identifies some common story types, as well as some questions that may help us find the story we want to tell.

These stories may be about finding meaning in a relationship with a family member, friend, neighbour, or co-worker. The story may be a way to remember and honour someone who has passed away. It may be a story about romantic love.

These are stories about our travels and what we realized along the way.

These are stories about achieving a goal, like getting a job or winning a sports game.

These are stories about special places like a home, a town, a gathering place, a mountain, or a forest. These places can shape our values and sense of community.

These are stories about your job, hobby, or volunteer role.

These are stories about learning. They might be about a first, an embarrassing moment, or a mistake.

With all these possibilities, finding the right story to tell can be difficult. Lambert recommends the following activities to help you get started:

There is a seed of a story somewhere in the thoughts generated by these exercises. The key is to start with a small idea. Play with that small idea as though it’s a block of clay. Keep sculpting the details of your idea, looking at it from different angles until it starts to take on the rough shape of the story you want to tell.

In 2012, 20 youth in the Native Youth Enrichment Program at the University of Washington participated in a digital storytelling workshop. Taté BlackBear, a Lakota teenager, was one of the participants . The American and Canadian governments tried to erase Aboriginal languages and cultures for over 100 years, so the Lakota have had to work very hard to keep their language alive. There are about 6,000 people who can speak the Lakota language. Taté knew six words in his traditional language.

As you watch, think about what category his story falls into. Think of the reasons behind your decision.
