The food choices you make at work can impact your overall health. Learn how to make healthy choices at work.

Making healthy choices at work matters

You make many choices about what you eat and drink every day at work. Most people will eat a meal and have multiple snacks and drinks throughout their work day. This gives you many chances to make healthy food choices.

Making healthy choices can be difficult since many foods and drinks are sold or available in the workplace. These options can influence your eating habits in both positive and negative ways.

How to make healthy choices at work

You can use these ideas to make healthy choices.

Include your meals and snacks for work in your meal plan. Knowing what you’re going to eat at work and preparing some of the items in advance is helpful. It can save you time and keep you organized, even on busy days.

The foods you have available are the foods you are most likely to eat.

Even if you plan ahead, you may forget to pack something to eat or not pack enough some days. Keep a small amount of healthy foods available at work.

It can also be helpful not to keep highly processed foods or sugary drinks at work.

You may not have a fridge or space to prepare a meal at work, which can limit your meal options. Bring a small cooler bag or ice pack with you instead to keep fresh foods cold.

Other helpful items to have available include:

Having a specialty coffee or tea to start your shift or during your break can be a nice treat. However, many specialty drinks contain high amounts of sodium, sugars or saturated fat. Instead of these drinks, try:

If you eat at your work cafeteria, remember to follow the healthy eating recommendation to help you make a healthy choice when eating out. Many people think of eating out as a treat. However, if you do it often enough it’s important to think about how it fits into your eating pattern.

If possible, eat your meal away from your desk or place of work. This can help ensure you take the time to eat and are able to focus on your meal. Ask a co-worker to join you and eat together to make it more enjoyable.

Be mindful of your schedule

Shift work often means you work at different hours of the day or overnight. This can impact your eating and sleeping patterns, especially if your shift schedule changes from week to week. As a result, you may find it difficult to make healthy food choices.

Think about your work schedule and plan when you can have regular meals and snacks throughout the day.

Creating a work environment that supports healthy eating habits

Workplaces can promote healthy eating habits and positively affect their employees’ health by improving the food environment in the workplace.

Food and drinks are readily available in many workplaces. You can often find these items served or sold:

Workplaces can create a healthy food environment by:

Use these strategies when thinking about all of the different places food is offered or sold.

If you are hosting a meeting or conference and decide to serve food:

If you are planning a fundraiser:

If you are planning a work party or event:

Retail food, like cafeterias and vending machines

If you are trying to make food and drinks sold at your work healthier:

Consider creating a food and drink policy in your workplace that:

This can make it easier for those who are responsible for ordering food and drinks to know what to buy. If your workplace has any external food providers, share the policy with them. This will help them better understand what foods and drinks your workplace is looking for.

What you eat on a regular basis matters for your health.

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
