Learn about buying a home in Canada, including how to work with a real estate agent, get financing and get mortgage insurance.

Preparing to buy a home

Before buying a home, plan ahead for the related costs, including

To help you plan, use these online tools:

Ways to search for a home:

The Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation has 2 guides to help you buy a home:

Finding a real estate agent

A real estate agent can help you find and buy a home. They will

To find a real estate agent

Fraud is a small but growing concern for homebuyers in Canada.

Protect yourself from real estate fraud.

Once you find a home that you’re interested in, you can make an offer to purchase. If you’re using a real estate agent, they will help you make the offer.

If your offer of purchase is accepted, you need to hire a lawyer or notary to transfer the home to your name. You can find a lawyer online or ask your real estate agent to recommend one.

Most homebuyers need a mortgage loan to purchase their home. You can get a mortgage loan from

You pay back a mortgage through regular payments over a period of time (usually 25 years). Each payment will be split between paying down your loan balance (the principal) and paying the interest you’re charged to borrow the money.

Making a down payment and mortgage loan insurance

Your mortgage is equal to the home’s price minus your down payment. Your down payment is money you pay up front when buying a home. The minimum down payment you need depends on the home’s price.

If your down payment is less than 20% of the home’s total price, you’ll likely need mortgage loan insurance. This insurance

Learn more about mortgage loan insurance.

Your credit history shows how well you’ve managed your financial accounts, credit cards and other loans in the past. Your credit score is a number value based on your credit history and other factors.

Lenders look at your credit score when deciding whether to give you a mortgage. If you’re new to Canada, banks here may not recognize your credit history from another country. You can start building your credit score in Canada by making regular payments on your credit cards and other accounts.

If you want to buy a home, start building your Canadian credit history as soon as you can. Talk to someone at a bank about how to start.

Learn more about credit reports, history and scores.

If you make an offer on a home, you should make your offer with the condition that the home must pass a professional home inspection. This lets you cancel or change your offer if the inspector finds serious problems with the property.

A home inspector makes detailed inspections of properties for a fee. They’ll give you a report that you and your real estate agent can review. You can decide if the home needs repairs that affect the price you agree to pay.

Find an accredited home inspector.
