This month we feature: tips to building healthier habits

Last month, we released the Evidence Review Supporting Canada's food guide: 2025 summary. Results indicate that Canada's food guide remains scientifically sound, and its resources are relevant and useful.

Explore the variety of resources the food guide offers. Can't find what you're looking for? Check out the new integrated search feature at the top right of the webpage.

This delicious, flavour-packed corn and lentil soup is easy, satisfying, and freezer-friendly. Serve with toasted whole wheat bread.

Identifying barriers to changing your eating habits

January is often a time when people think about changes they'd like to make during the new year. It's not easy to change a habit – and making changes to eating habits is no exception. Many factors can make changing your eating habits hard.

Get started by considering the barriers that you face, and focus on those that you can change. Don't hesitate to ask for support from your family, friends, community, or health care providers.

Setting goals is a proven way to help make healthy lifestyle changes. Setting a SMART goal improves your chances of success.

Consider breaking a big goal down into smaller steps, and taking it one step at a time. You do not need to make a lot of changes at once. Start with one new healthy eating habit, then add others as your consistency and confidence grow.

Learn more about setting SMART goals.

There are many diets and food products marketed as the key to weight loss, good health or sport performance. However, they may not work and can be harmful to your health.

Health goals and individual needs can differ. It is important to find healthy food choices and habits that are right for you.

Canada's food guide's healthy eating recommendations provide relevant and evidence-based advice to support your nutritional health and well-being. Use these to help plan and choose improvements you'd like to make.

If you are looking for personalized guidance or specialized advice from a dietitian, you can:

Healthy eating recommendation of the month

Healthy eating is more than the foods you eat. It is also about where, when, why and how you eat. This month, we are promoting all of Canada's food guide's healthy eating recommendations.

Translated food guide snapshot of the month

Canada's food guide is a suite of online resources made to meet different needs. It includes the food guide snapshot, available online in many languages.

This month, discover the snapshot in Arabic.

In February, we'll explore tips to reducing sodium without losing flavour.

Originally published: January 6, 2026
