Ticks are arachnids like spiders and mites. Ticks go through 4 life stages:

The length of the tick lifecycle varies among tick species. Depending on the species, ticks can take several years to develop from egg to adult.

Ticks need to feed on blood to develop from one life stage to the next life stage. Adult female ticks also need to feed on blood in order to lay eggs. Ticks feed on hosts, which can be mammals, birds and reptiles.

Not all ticks carry bacteria, viruses and parasites that can make people sick. Ticks only become infected when they feed on an infected host.

Infected ticks can transmit bacteria, viruses and parasites that can cause tick-borne diseases, such as:

You may not notice a tick bite because ticks are tiny, and their bites are usually painless.

Removing attached ticks as soon as possible reduces the chance of infection.

How to properly remove a tick

Ticks are often found in and near areas with:

You can sometimes find ticks in areas outside of where they're known to live.

Ticks can be active whenever the temperature is consistently above freezing, and the ground isn't covered by snow. You're most likely to encounter ticks during the spring, summer and fall. However, when conditions are favourable, ticks can be active at any time of the year.

How to identify a tick

You can identify a tick by:

Tick identification can help to:

Types of ticks in Canada

More than 40 different types of ticks live in Canada.

Established ticks live and reproduce in the location they are found.

Adventitious ticks are brought in by migratory animals such as birds and deer or other hosts from outside of Canada. Some of these adventitious ticks have become established in Canada in areas where habitats are suitable for reproducing.

Climate change is contributing to an increase in:

In Canada, there are several types of tick that can cause tick-borne diseases. We've listed some of them here to help you identify them.

Blacklegged ticks (deer ticks) are established in:

They can transmit bacteria, viruses and parasites that can cause:

Source: Institut national de santé publique du Québec

Western blacklegged ticks are established in the coastal and southern interior of British Columbia. They can transmit bacteria that can cause:

Source: British Columbia Centre for Disease Control

American dog ticks are established in parts of southcentral and southeastern Canada. They can transmit bacteria that can cause:

Source: Institut national de santé publique du Québec

Groundhog ticks are established in southcentral and southeastern Canada. They can transmit the virus that can cause Powassan virus disease.

Source: Institut national de santé publique du Québec

Rocky Mountain wood ticks are established in:

They can transmit the bacteria that can cause:

Source: British Columbia Centre for Disease Control

Squirrel ticks are found in the southern regions of:

They can transmit the virus that can cause Powassan virus disease.

Source: Institut national de santé publique du Québec

Brown dog ticks haven't been found in natural outdoor environments in Canada. They have been reported in:

They can transmit the bacteria that can cause Rocky Mountain spotted fever. You can find them any time of year because they live in indoor environments.

Source: Institut national de santé publique du Québec

Adult female lone star ticks have a white dot on their backs.

They have been found in southern regions of:

They can transmit bacteria and viruses that can cause:

Some people who are bitten by lone star ticks can develop:

Source: Institut national de santé publique du Québec

The Public Health Agency of Canada works with provincial and territorial public health authorities, researchers and academics to monitor tick populations across Canada.

Active tick monitoring uses field study methods to collect ticks from their natural habitat or from animals.

Passive tick monitoring uses ticks collected from people and pets that are submitted voluntarily by health care professionals, veterinarians or the public. These ticks are submitted to local public health units for species identification, or photos can be sent to an image-based identification platform like eTick.

Provincial and territorial public health authorities

Subscribe to the Zoonoses Bulletin

The Zoonoses Bulletin is an email subscription list that will provide you with regular updates from the Public Health Agency of Canada regarding our work on zoonoses. Zoonoses are infectious diseases that can be spread between animals and people, including those that can be spread through the bite of a tick or mosquito.
