And now, Words and Their Stories, from VOA Learning English.

In life, some of our decisions and actions are well thought out. They involve research, examination, and time for thought. And other decisions and actions are not well thought out. We make them quickly, without thinking, almost like a pure physical reaction.

We can call these decisions, actions or reactions knee-jerk .

This term comes from a medical process. Meriam Webster defines the noun "knee jerk" as “an involuntary forward kick produced by a light blow on the tendon below the kneecap.” It is an involuntary action. It's automatic.

The words “involuntary” and “automatic” are important when understanding the term “knee jerk” and when to use it. Knee-jerk reactions seem to happen automatically without a decision-making process.

We often use “knee jerk” as an adjective.

Like hitting your kneecap to move your leg, knee-jerk reactions or statements also seem like an involuntary reflex .

"Knee jerk" also describes predictable behavior. Again, hit the knee, the leg will kick every time. So "knee jerk" describes someone who always reacts quickly and without enough thought.

For example, let’s say you are on a team with someone who never faces responsibility for their mistakes in the game. If brought to account, the player always blames the dropped ball on other teammates. You can say that player is having a knee-jerk reaction to criticism. They have a go-to response. It’s like a reflex they can’t control.

We often use knee-jerk in a criticizing or negative way.

Now, a gut reaction also happens without thinking. But it is a bit different than a knee-jerk response. A gut reaction is a feeling. When we have a gut reaction, our instincts are telling us that something may not be right. Gut reactions are instinctual warnings.

So, we also use this expression a bit differently than "knee jerk." We usually talk about our own gut reactions or impulses, not others.

One day, I was hiking on a mountain in California. I had hiked for about two hours and was near the top. The view, I was told, was truly beautiful. I couldn’t wait to see it! Then, suddenly, I had a strange feeling. Something just didn’t feel right. I can’t explain why, but my gut instinct was to turn around and head back down the mountain. I later found out that a dangerous bear had been sighted in the same area that I had fled. I am so thankful I listened to my gut instinct.

And that’s Words and Their Stories . Until next time, I’m Anna Matteo.

Anna Matteo wrote this story for VOA Learning English.

involuntary -adj. not normally under the control of the will

automatic -adj. largely or wholly involuntary :acting or done without conscious thought or intention

reflex -n. an automatic response to a stimulus in which a nerve message passes from a sense organ to the spinal cord and then to a point of action (as a muscle or gland) often without first passing to the brain

negative -adj. not positive or helpful

instinct -n. behavior that is based on automatic actions
