It’s not easy to change a habit. Eating habits are no exception. There are many different factors that make changing your eating habits difficult. But over time and with small steps you can be well on your way.

A barrier is anything that keeps you from reaching your goal. Can you identify some of the barriers you have faced before when trying to change your eating habits? Or what can possibly hold you back in the future? Knowing what these barriers are will help you find ways to overcome them. Don’t hesitate to get support from family, friends or a health care provider.

Here are some common barriers and ways to help you overcome them.

It costs too much to eat well

Healthy eating doesn’t have to cost more. You can choose many different healthy foods when eating on a budget. Here are some strategies to help you stay within your budget and change your eating habits:

I find it hard to eat well when I eat out

It may seem hard to change your eating habits if you’re eating out a lot. Here are some ideas you can try to help you reach your healthy eating goals:

I don’t have enough time to prepare healthy meals

Preparing meals can take a long time but it doesn’t have to. Here are some ideas to help you save time when it comes to preparing healthy meals:

I doubt I will ever be able to change my eating habits

Don’t be afraid. Often times fear is a big barrier when it comes to changing your eating habits. Here are some strategies to follow:

Setting goals is an excellent way to motivate you to make healthy lifestyle changes. SMART goal setting is creating an action plan that can help you change your eating habits. SMART goals are:

Specific: What do you want to do?

You should describe exactly what you would like to achieve. Being precise in your goal will allow you to focus on it and bring you closer to achieving it.

Measurable: How much will you do and how often will you do it?

You will indicate a quantity, duration and frequency for the goal. This way, you can mark down on a calendar or in a journal when you’ve worked on your goal. This gives you proof of your progress and helps motivate you to continue.

Achievable: Can you do it?

You should figure out ways you can reach your goal. Your attitudes, abilities, skills and supports should be well-matched to the goal you are trying to achieve. Your goals should be challenging, but not so hard that you will not be able to achieve them.

For example, eating spinach every day would not be a good goal if you really dislike spinach. However, eating one green vegetable every day is a more achievable goal.

Relevant: Is it helpful for you?

Your goal should be something that is meaningful to you that you are willing and able to work towards.

Time bound: When will you do it?

You will specify a time period when you will work towards this goal. You will decide when you want to start working on it and when you would like to have achieved it.

Healthy eating SMART goal example:

Setting and achieving goals may not be a straightforward process. Revisit goals often and make changes as necessary to help you achieve them.

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
