The foods in your home and how you prepare them can have a big impact on your overall health. Learn how to make healthy choices at home.

Making healthy choices at home matters

Your home environment is important when it comes to healthy eating.

The home is the place where many food activities occur, including preparing, preserving, cooking and eating food.

It is also the place where many food decisions are made. These include:

The foods in your home influence what you eat. Having healthier options available makes it easier to prepare and eat healthy meals and snacks. Likewise, having highly processed foods available may cause you to eat more of these foods without you even realizing it.

When you prepare and cook food at home, it allows you to:

How to make healthy food choices at home

Use these ideas to make healthy food choices at home.

Plan what you’re going to eat

Find healthy and tasty recipes that you and those in your household will enjoy.

Follow the healthy eating recommendation to help you plan ahead.

Only buy and bring home the foods you need and know you will eat. This can help you:

Pre-wash, chop and store healthy foods to make them easier to use when they are needed. Properly canning, preserving and freezing seasonal foods can help you have these types of foods all year-round.

Limit the number of highly processed foods

Having fewer of these foods available in your home can help you:

Follow the healthy eating recommendation to help you limit highly processed foods.

Grow and harvest your own food

Growing and harvesting your own food gives you access to fresh seasonal foods. If you don’t have the space to grow food at home or are new to gardening, consider joining a community garden.

Almost half of the food waste created across the food system is produced at the household level. You can help reduce food waste by:

Creating a home that supports healthy eating habits

A home environment that supports healthy eating habits is just as important as the foods you eat. These habits help form a healthy eating pattern.

Set yourself up for success with these strategies:

You can be a role model for others in your household. Your healthy eating habits may encourage those around you to make healthy choices too.

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
