Learn why healthy eating is important for seniors.

Healthy eating is a key part of aging well. It is a way for you to stay healthy and strong, which is important to maintain your independence and quality of life.

As you age, you face different changes that may make:

Cooking and eating healthy food does not have to be difficult, time consuming or expensive. Consider these ideas to help you maintain healthy eating habits as you age.

Enjoy a variety of healthy foods

As you age, it is important to eat a variety of healthy foods to make sure you get enough of the different nutrients you need.

Choose a variety of vegetables and fruits, whole grain foods and protein foods that you enjoy.

Every day, choose a variety of:

If you are 51 years of age or older, take a supplement with 400 IU (10 µg) of vitamin D every day.

If your sense of taste or smell has changed, try different spices and herbs to add more flavour, instead of salt. You can also switch up the texture and temperature of foods to make them more interesting.

If some foods have become more difficult to eat, try choosing and preparing foods differently. For example, for a softer texture, try cooking vegetables instead of eating them raw.

As you age, your sense of thirst may decline, but you still need to drink regularly whether you feel thirsty or not. To stay hydrated, drink throughout the day and with each meal and snack. Satisfy your thirst with water instead of sugary drinks.

Other foods and drinks that can help keep you hydrated include:

Shopping for 1 or 2

It can be challenging to grocery shop for just 1 or 2 people.

Think about meals and snacks you would like to eat and plan your meals around your ideas.

Make a grocery list to help you remember what foods you need.

Choose affordable healthy options if you are grocery shopping on a budget. Some grocery stores offer discount days for seniors.

Make it easy on yourself. Try shopping:

Cooking for 1 or 2

You may find it hard to cook healthy meals for 1 or 2 people, especially if you:

Prepare meals and snacks on days when you have the most energy. On days when you are too tired to cook, choose recipes that only use a few ingredients and require little to no cooking.

Cook once, eat twice. Make meals that are great as leftovers or make a larger amount and freeze the extras.

Alternate a cooking day with a friend. This allows you to share the task of making meals and gives you the chance to try each other’s recipes and food traditions.

Eating with others is great for the company and it can also be good for your health. It may encourage you to eat more of the foods that you need to stay healthy.

Eat with others as much as you can. Try:

Check local seniors’ community centres and ask about monthly lunches or community kitchens you could join.

If you live alone, sitting down to eat a meal by yourself can feel lonely. Try these ideas to keep it enjoyable:

Create an emergency food supply

It is a good idea to stock your pantry with a variety of non-perishable food items. You can use these items to make a few meals for times you are not able to get to the store.

Ideas of foods to keep on hand include:

You can keep a variety of foods in your freezer, including:

Check out resources in your community

Your neighbourhood may have different options and services available to you. Explore resources such as:

What you eat on a regular basis matters for your health.

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
