Learn about the different types of transportation in Canada.

Due to Canada’s large size, people often travel between major cities by airplane.

All main cities have airports with regularly scheduled flights to and from many places. Some places don’t have a main airport, such as small towns or rural areas.

If you’re travelling to a place without an airport you’ll need to:

To fly in Canada, you need:

Canada’s rail network runs across the country.

Trains in Canada are safe and comfortable. It’s often cheaper to buy train tickets in advance.

You can find out more and buy tickets from Via Rail Canada or going to a train station in person.

Travel by bus can be very long if you have to go a great distance. But, there are many benefits if you choose the bus, including:

The largest network of bus routes is run by a company called Greyhound and its partners. You can find out more and buy bus tickets by calling or visiting your local bus station.

In coastal areas of Canada such as British Columbia and the Atlantic region, ferry boats are a common way to travel. Many ferries transport both passengers and vehicles.

You can find out more and buy tickets from ferry companies that operate routes in your area.

Canada has a large network of highways, making long distance travel by car possible between most places.

All cities and most major towns in Canada have a public transportation system with one or more ways to travel, such as:

If you plan to use public transportation, research your options before you decide where to live.

The bus is the most common form of urban transportation in Canada. Some cities have other modes of public transit. In most cases, you can easily transfer from one mode of transportation to another.

To use public transportation, you must buy a ticket or a transit pass. Transit passes give you unlimited use of public transportation for a certain period (one month or more). They are usually cheaper than buying many tickets if you plan to use public transportation often.

In most cities, you can buy tickets at:

You can find out more about public transportation in your city or town by:

Transportation for people with physical disabilities

Public transportation often has features to help people with physical disabilities. In many cities and towns, there are services specifically for people with limited mobility.

Learn more about these services in the same way you’d learn more about other public transportation options.

All cities and towns have one or more companies that offer taxi service.

Taxis are quite expensive, so many people only use them when they don’t have another option. If you want to know how much your trip will cost, ask the driver before the trip starts.

Taxi drivers have an official identification card to show that they are licensed by the city. You can find the card on the dashboard of the taxi.

There are two ways of catching a taxi:

Walking and cycling are healthy and cheap ways of getting around Canadian cities and towns.

You can usually get a map of bicycle routes from:

Newcomer services in your area

We can help you find free services near you
