To work in Greece through the Youth Mobility Agreement, you must:

Other requirements may apply. Check Greece’s website for more details.

What type of work visa do I need?

You need to apply for a Long-Stay Type D Visa. This visa has three categories:

Post-secondary graduates who want to get additional training or work experience in Greece through a pre-arranged contract of employment (job offer) to help further their career development.

Registered post-secondary students who want to complete part of their academic curriculum in Greece through a pre-arranged training contract that is related to their field of studies.

Young Canadians who want to travel to Greece and work temporarily to help fund their trip.

Do I need a formal job or internship offer?

Yes, you need a job offer (pre-arranged contract of employment) or a formal internship offer if you apply to:

No, you don’t need one if you apply to category c.

How long can I stay and work?

You can stay and work in Greece for up to 12 months.

You can participate in Greece’s Youth Mobility Agreement twice. Your second participation must be in a different category.

Greece is located in south-eastern Europe and is made up of three main areas. Its mainland is located at the southernmost tip of the Balkan Peninsula. The Peloponnese peninsula and around 6,000 islands and islets make up the rest of the country.

The diversity of Greece’s landscape allows you to enjoy nature at its best. Hike in rich forests, visit lakes and waterfalls on the mainland or explore sea caves, sea parks and volcanoes on the islands in the Aegean and Ionian Sea. With over 250 days of sunshine a year and more than 16,000 km of coastline, you can enjoy beaches on both the mainland and islands. Hundreds of these beaches have received the world-renowned “Blue Flag” award for water quality, safety, access and environmental protection.

Greece offers some of the most significant historical attractions, museums and archaeological sites in the world. Visit the ancient temples of Athens including the Acropolis or the Temple of Hephaestus. Explore Roman ruins and churches in Thessaloniki. Enjoy beach retreats and nightlife in Mykonos. There is an endless amount of things to do and see in one of the most popular travel destinations in the world.

The best way to make sure your trip is the experience of a lifetime is to plan. Review our travel checklist to find out what you should know or do before travelling to and working in a foreign country.

Before you leave, remember to register as a Canadian abroad to receive notifications in case of an emergency while you are abroad or of a personal emergency at home. The service also enables you to receive important information before or during a natural disaster or civil unrest.

Need help planning? One of IEC’s recognized organizations might be able to help you find a job, transportation, and provide travel advice.

Most recognized organizations charge a fee for their services.

Find a job (Available in Greek only)

Safety and travel advice for 2SLGBTQI+ travellers
