When you write a cheque, you’re asking your financial institution to:

Personal cheques are a common way of paying rent or bills. Some merchants may still accept personal cheques.

Things to consider when you pay by cheque

When you pay by cheque:

Learn more about non-sufficient funds fees.

Get electronic alerts from your financial institution

Your financial institution may send you an electronic alert when the balance of your chequing account falls below a certain amount.

These alerts may help you manage your finances and avoid fees.

Learn more about electronic alerts.

You may lose a cheque, someone may steal it or it may have an error on it. If so, you may want to request a stop payment to prevent the person or merchant from cashing it.

Not all financial institutions provide a stop payment service. You usually have to pay a fee for this service.

To request a stop payment, you must provide your financial institution with certain information, such as the:

For a stop payment to work, your financial institution needs time to process it before someone cashes the cheque. In some cases, your financial institution may not successfully process your request before someone cashes the cheque.

This may be because your financial institution received incomplete or wrong information about the:

If a stop payment doesn’t work, you’re still responsible for the amount of the cheque. To get your money back, contact the payee and ask if they will give it back. Some institutions may reimburse you the fees charged for an unsuccessful stop payment.

Someone other than the person named on the front of the cheque may cash a counter-signed check. This is if they sign on the back, or counter-sign it.

You can avoid someone doing this without your permission. Write “for deposit only to account of payee” on the back of your cheque. This way, only the person or merchant whose name is on the front of the cheque can deposit it.

Doing so may also help protect you if the person or merchant signs the cheque over to a third party. For example, a cheque cashing service. Your cheque may not go through because of your stop payment. In that case, the third party may take steps against you to recover the money. This could include legal action.

Someone may tell you that they can’t cash your cheque because it’s stale-dated. In that case, ask for the original cheque back before writing a new one.

Financial institutions don’t have to cash a cheque if it's too old, or stale-dated.

Financial institutions usually consider a cheque stale-dated after 6 months, unless it's:

Keep track of whether cheques you write were cashed or not. This will ensure that if a financial institution cashes a stale-dated cheque, you have the money to cover it. This could help you avoid NSF fees.

A person or a merchant can’t cash a post-dated cheque before a certain date.

If your financial institution cashes a post-dated cheque before the date indicated, try to resolve this with them. Ask your financial institution to put the money back into your account. You must make the request before the date on the cheque.

You may not be able to resolve the issue or it may result in NSF fees. In that case, you can file a complaint with your financial institution.

A dishonoured cheque is when the cheque doesn’t go through. The financial institution refuses to pay the amount.

Reasons for a dishonoured cheque may include:

Dishonoured cheques are returned to your financial institution.

Filing a complaint about a cheque cashed on your account

If you have a complaint about a cheque that was cashed on your account, contact your financial institution.

All federally regulated financial institutions must have a complaint-handling process in place to resolve disputes with consumers.

Learn how to file a complaint with your financial institution.
