A savings account pays interest on the money you deposit, also known as the principal. Many people who open a savings account also have a chequing account for their day-to-day banking.

What to consider when choosing a savings account

When shopping around for a savings account, pay attention to the following features.

You may need to deposit a minimum amount to set up certain savings accounts.

Some accounts may need you to keep a certain amount of money in the account to earn interest. In some cases you might need to keep at least $1,000 in the account before it pays interest.

You earn interest on the money in your savings account. Each month, any interest you earn will go directly into your account. The higher the interest rate, the more money you‘ll earn. Consider how much interest your financial institution will pay on your account balance.

Financial institutions may offer high-interest introductory rates. These run for a certain period. After the time's up, the interest rate may be lower.

You don’t usually pay monthly fees to have a savings account.

You may still have to pay fees for transactions like withdrawals or transfers. Most savings accounts offer a limited number of transactions. Some savings accounts won’t charge you transactions fees if you keep a minimum monthly balance.

Read your account agreement and find out what the service fees are for withdrawals and transfers.

Use the Account Comparison Tool to find the savings account that best suits your needs.

Your financial institution may charge you non-sufficient funds (NSF) fees. This happens when there isn’t enough money in your account to cover a transaction, like a pre-authorized transfer from your savings account to another.

Make sure you know how much your financial institution will charge you for non-sufficient funds.

Learn more about non-sufficient funds fees.

Accessing the money in your savings account

A savings account usually offers quick and easy access to your money for withdrawals and transfers.

If you use your account mainly to save money, you’ll likely only need to make transactions occasionally.

If you need to withdraw money from your account, consider the following:

You may have to transfer money from your savings account to a chequing account before you can withdraw. In this case, it may take extra time to access the money.

How your financial institution calculates interest

Carefully review the terms of the account to find out how your financial institution applies interest. Some financial institutions apply two or more different interest rates to your balance.

Find out if your financial institution will pay the higher interest rate:

Bank 3 might not pay interest during a month where you take out money.

With compound interest, your initial deposit earns interest. The money you earn in interest is added to your savings. You'll continue to earn interest on your total savings. This means the interest you earn will earn interest. The more often your interest is compounded, the more your account balance will grow.

Financial institutions usually advertise a compound interest rate for a savings account.

Usually, the advertised interest rate is annual. However, accounts may compound interest monthly or daily. Accounts that compound interest daily earn interest faster than accounts that compound interest monthly.

Ask your financial institution how often it compounds the interest paid to your account.

Suppose you deposit $100 into your savings account every month. Your money starts to earn interest as soon as you deposit it. Your account has an annual interest rate of 2%, compounded monthly.

This means that, each month, you'll earn about 0.167% (which is 2% divided by 12 months) on your balance. This includes any interest paid in the previous months.

After one month, you have $100 in your account and will earn $0.17 interest ($100 x 0.167%). After the second month, your interest will be calculated based on the $200 you’ve deposited, plus the $0.17 interest earned in the first month.

On a balance of $200.17, you’ll earn $0.33 in interest ($200.17 x 0.167%).

Each month, the amount of interest you earn will increase. By the end of the first year, you’ll earn a total of $13.08 in interest.

The longer you continue to save and earn compound interest, the faster your savings will grow.

The example uses rough figures. Actual results will depend on how the financial institution calculates interest.

For example, the formula may depend on the number of days in the month. This would result in your financial institution paying a little more interest during the longest months.

Paying taxes on money in your savings account

You usually have to pay income tax on the interest earned in your savings account. Each year, your financial institution will send you a Statement of investment income (T5). You must submit it along with your personal income tax return. A T5 shows how much investment income you earned for a given tax year. This includes income you earned from interest in bank accounts.

Learn how to read the information on your T5 slip.

If your goal is long-term savings, think about getting a Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA). You don’t pay tax on the interest you make and the money you withdraw from a TFSA.

Learn more about the Tax-Free Savings Account.
