To prevent accidents in the bathroom, never leave your child alone in the bathroom. When the bathroom is not being used, keep the door closed.

Children younger than 6 years old should not be left unattended in the bathtub. They should also not be in the bathroom alone if there is water in the bathtub.

Empty the tub after baths. Make sure the tub is empty before you leave the bathroom.

Older siblings bathing with younger ones should not be put in charge of a younger child's safety. There should be an adult in the bathroom during bath time.

Prevent slipping in the tub by using non-skid decals or a rubber mat inside the tub. Dry the floor and your child's feet after a bath to prevent slips. Teach your child never to run in the bathroom because of the risk of slipping on a wet floor.

Encourage your child to stay seated during their bath by providing bath toys or a bath seat.

Prevent injuries or burns from faucets by covering the spout, blocking your child's reach to the spout, and teaching your child not to touch the spout.

Keep the temperature on your hot water heater set below 120°F (49°C). Or, install an anti-scald valve to prevent the water from going above 120°F (49°C).

Keep other items in your bathroom that may hurt your child out of their reach. These include:

Keep all electronic items unplugged while your child is in the bathroom. Store all cleaning products out of the bathroom or in a locked cabinet.

Any medicines kept in the bathroom should be stored in a locked cabinet. This includes medicines that were bought without a prescription.

Keep all medicines in their original bottles, which should have childproof caps.

Place a lid lock on the toilet to prevent a curious toddler from drowning.

Never leave a child unattended around large buckets of water. Empty the buckets after using them.

Make sure grandparents, friends, and other caretakers follow bathroom safety guidelines. Make sure your child's daycare also follows these guidelines.

Well child - bathroom safety

American Academy of Pediatrics website. 5 bathroom safety tips for infants and young children. www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/at-home/Pages/Bathroom-Safety.aspx. Updated January 24, 2017. Accessed November 18, 2024.

Prince WB. Drowning and submersion injury. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 88.

Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
