Learn how to spot problems, correct mistakes, report fraud and add a fraud alert. Check your credit report regularly to make sure the information is accurate. Look for errors or signs of fraud, such as accounts you didn’t open.

What to look for on your credit report

Your credit report shows how well you manage your credit. Lenders use this report to decide if they’ll offer you credit or loans and at what interest rate. It may also affect your ability to rent a home or get certain jobs.

Errors on your credit report may:

Review your credit report regularly for errors or fraud. Get it from both Equifax and TransUnion. That way, you may be able to detect problems sooner.

Learn how to get your credit report.

Once you get your credit report, look for:

Learn how long information stays on your credit report.

Accounts that you don't recognize might mean that someone has applied for credit in your name. Examine them to be sure it's not fraud or identity theft.

Credit monitoring alerts you to certain changes in your credit report and score, such as a new credit inquiry. It may help you detect identity theft or credit card fraud early, especially if someone applies for credit in your name.

You may want to use credit monitoring if:

Canada’s credit bureaus and many credit card issuers and financial institutions offer credit monitoring services. You usually need to pay for these services. Some institutions may offer it for free in certain circumstances. For example, if you’ve been affected by a data breach.

Reporting errors or fraud on your credit report

If you find an error or potential fraud on your credit report:

In some provinces or territories, you may also be able to place a security freeze on your credit report. Credit bureaus may also call it a credit freeze or credit lock.

A security freeze locks your credit report. It blocks lenders from accessing your report and helps prevent fraudsters from opening accounts in your name. Remember to remove a security freeze before applying for credit or loans.

Contact Equifax and TransUnion to learn how to place a security freeze on your credit report and see if you qualify.

A fraud alert, or identity alert, tells lenders you may be a victim of fraud. Before they approve any credit application, they’ll need to contact you and confirm your identity. This may help prevent any further fraud.

Ask Equifax and TransUnion to place a fraud alert on your credit report if:

The credit bureaus may ask you to provide identification. They may charge a fee.

Fixing errors on your credit report

You have the right to dispute any information on your credit report that you believe is wrong. Credit bureaus must correct errors for free.

Collect any receipts, statements and other documents that prove there’s a mistake.

Contact Canada’s 2 main credit bureaus

Use the forms from Equifax and TransUnion to report the error.

The credit bureaus will examine your claim with the lender or organization that reported the information. If they agree that there’s an error, the credit bureaus will correct the information. If the lender or organization says that the information is correct, the credit bureau will keep it on your report.

In some provinces, credit bureaus must send a copy of your revised credit report to organizations who recently requested it.

Learn how to dispute information with Equifax.

Learn how to dispute information with TransUnion.

You may be able to speed up the process by contacting the lender directly. Ask them to verify their files and provide the updated information to the credit bureaus.

If you’re not satisfied with the results of the investigation, ask to speak with someone at a higher level.

Federally regulated financial institutions must have a complaint procedure to help resolve disputes with their customers. This includes access to an external complaints body.

Learn how to file a complaint with your bank.

If you’re not satisfied with the results of the investigation, you may add a brief statement to your credit report. This explains your situation and is called a consumer statement. It's free to add a consumer statement to your credit report.

The credit bureaus set the number of words allowed in your statement. This may vary depending on your province.

Lenders and others who review your credit report may consider your consumer statement when they make their decisions about your credit.

Filing a complaint about a credit bureau

The Federal government doesn’t regulate credit bureaus. If you feel that a credit bureau didn’t treat you fairly, you may choose to file a complaint. Start by contacting the credit bureau directly.

Find the process to follow when filing a complaint.

If you wish to make a complaint, contact your provincial or territorial consumer affairs office.

Find your provincial or territorial consumer affairs office.
