Creating healthy meals and snacks can be simple when you use the Canada’s food guide plate.

How to make a healthy meal

Use the proportions of foods on the Canada’s food guide plate as a tool to help you make healthy meals or snacks.

Step 1: Make half your plate vegetables and fruits. Vegetables and fruits should always make up the largest proportion of the foods you eat throughout the day.

Step 2: Make one-quarter of your plate whole grain foods.

Step 3: Make one-quarter of your plate protein foods. Choose protein foods that come from plants more often.

The healthy food choices shown on the plate are only examples. The size and amount of each food shown on the plate is not meant to show how much to eat at one time.

You can choose a variety of healthy foods that you enjoy. Healthy food choices can be fresh, frozen, canned or dried.

Not all meals look exactly like the Canada’s food guide plate. Use the plate proportions as a reference tool whether your meal or snack is served:

How to use the Canada's food guide plate

The plate encourages you to eat many different healthy foods to help develop a healthy eating pattern and maintain your health.

You can use the plate as a guide for everything you eat, including:

The proportions of foods for all of your snacks throughout the day should generally follow the proportions of the Canada’s food guide plate.

Use the plate as a guide to include a vegetable or fruit at each snack. Try:

You can use the plate as a guide to make half of your breakfast vegetables and fruits.

It’s all about being creative. You can try:

Use Canada’s food guide plate as a tool to make meals that your whole family can enjoy together. Remember that:

No matter the type of meal or snack, make sure half of it is vegetables and fruits.

You can use the plate as a guide even when the foods in your meal are mixed together, like in a:

Think about the proportions of the foods being combined to make your mixed dish. For example, when making a stir-fry:

No matter what type of dish, remember to start by making half the meal vegetables and fruits.

What you eat on a regular basis matters for your health.

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
