Learn more about other funding opportunities

You can apply between August 3, 2021 to September 14, 2021 at 3:00 pm Eastern Daylight Time (EDT).

Eligible organizations can apply for up to $72,500,000 per year. Organizations must commit to act as an intermediary until March 31, 2024.

We will select organizations that will act as intermediaries to:

Note: SMEs will receive a maximum financial incentive of $20,000 for a maximum of 2 newly created positions per year, per SME.

This Call for Proposals (CFP) will provide funding to intermediaries that have the capacity to support SMEs to hire new, first-year apprentices by:

Organizations must meet all the following eligibility criteria:

* Note: Indigenous organizations will be exempt from this requirement.

Note to organizations located and operating in Quebec:

Some applicants in the province of Quebec are subject to the Act respecting the Ministère du Conseil exécutif (R.S.Q. c. M-30) of the Government of Quebec. These applicants are eligible to submit a proposal. However, if we accept your project, you will also need to obtain the approval of the Government of Quebec before we can fund your project.

Your project must meet all of the following criteria:

Note: We will only consider 1 application per organization.

How we assess your application

We will review your application in 3 steps by:

Note: It is important to submit a complete application. Make sure you have all the documents you need before you apply. If your application is incomplete, we will notify you by email. You will have 5 business days to submit the missing information. If your application is not complete by that time, we will reject it from the process.

We will assess your project only if all of the following eligibility requirements are met and the necessary documentation has been provided:

* Note: Indigenous organizations will be exempt from this requirement.

We will assess the merit of your application based on the following criteria:

Describe how the organization will support SMEs to hire new, first-year apprentices.

In selecting the Intermediaries, we will prioritize proposals from organizations that:

Gather your supporting documents and information

Apply online, by email or mail

Gather your supporting documents and information

If you cannot email the required documents, you can send them by mail to the address above. In your email, tell us if you are sending other documents by mail.

Our application form uses PDF form technology. You must have a PDF reader installed to use the form correctly. There are several readers available on the Internet for free that support our form:

Adobe Reader 8 or higher, for example:

Make sure that you have Adobe Acrobat Reader 8 or higher or Foxit Reader installed on your system.

When prompted to open or save the form, select the down arrow on the Save button, and select Save as.

Select your folder location and save (file type must be PDF).

Reopen the form from your computer:

Make sure that the form opens in 1 of the Reader Softwares (Adobe or Foxit), by looking at the top of your screen. For example, you should see:

Begin inputting and save your information.

Before submitting your application, make sure that the Application Form is completed and all information is saved properly.

To move from 1 field to the next on the form, hit Tab. This ensures that you do not accidently skip over any fields.

Some sections of the form perform calculations based on the amounts you enter and will automatically calculate totals in the appropriate fields.

You are responsible for the completeness and accuracy of any information submitted. Please double-check all data you enter.

Note: We cannot accept links to cloud based documents, such as Dropbox or Google Drive. Applications sent using such means will be rejected.

We will review your application and decide if you are selected to become an intermediary.

We will select the successful organizations by winter 2022.

You will receive an automatic confirmation of receipt.

You will receive an automatic confirmation of receipt by email.

You will receive a confirmation of receipt by email within 14 calendar days. We will use the email address you provided in your application.

If you have questions, email us at EDSC.SA-AS.ESDC@servicecanada.gc.ca.

We will answer questions sent before September 12, 2021 at 3:00 pm EDT.

If you need any accessibility-related accommodation, please email us with the details. We strive to accommodate all of your needs in line with accessibility standards. We will accept accessibility requests until September 7, 2021, at 3:00 p.m. EDT.

We will hold an information session on August 18, 2021. You can participate online or by teleconference. If you are interested, send an email to EDSC.SA-AS.ESDC@servicecanada.gc.ca.

In your email, specify your preferred language (English or French) and if you need accommodations.

We will provide you with the instructions on how and when to attend.

An existing network consists of a number of organizations that already collaborate with each other and/or memberships in 1 or more networking groups. The network(s) in place can be used and/or quickly expanded to deliver the Apprenticeship Service.

An organization that has the capacity to:

A lack of access to resources and facilities that may limit employment and apprenticeship opportunities in the trades with limited resources or minimal formal infrastructure, for example:

On a community level, a lack of infrastructure represents a lack of access to resources and facilities that may have a direct impact on community well-being, for example:

A situation where establishing partnerships is more challenging due in part to:

Remote and isolated regions can be economically depressed and find it difficult to find employer partners or deliver demand-driven programming, for example:

Designated trades that are governed by regulations under the Provincial and Territorial Apprenticeship Acts. These regulations outline the administrative procedures and in some cases the standards and conditions of training for specific trades, such as:

List of the 39 Construction and Manufacturing Red Seal Trades

A geographical area where a community is located over 350 km from the nearest service centre having year-round road access. This could include geographical areas that have scheduled flights and good telephone services, but are without year-round road access, for example:

A business establishment with 499 paid employees or less at the time that it receives the funding.
