When you have diabetes, you should aim to have good control of your blood sugar (glucose). If your blood sugar is not controlled, serious health problems called complications can happen to your body. Learn how to manage your blood sugar so that you can stay as healthy as possible.

Take Control of Your Diabetes

Know the basic steps for managing your diabetes. Poorly managed diabetes can lead to many health problems.

If you take insulin, you should also know how to:

You should also live a healthy lifestyle.

Take your medicines the way your provider recommends. Contact your provider if you think an adjustment to your medicines is needed.

Check Your Blood Sugar Often

Checking your blood sugar levels often and writing down, or using an app to track the results will tell you how well you are managing your diabetes. Talk to your provider and diabetes educator about how often you should check your blood sugar. Also ask whether you should consider using a continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) device.

Usually, you will test your blood sugar before meals and at bedtime. You may also check your blood sugar:

Keep a record for yourself and your provider. This will be a big help if you are having problems managing your diabetes. It will also tell you what works and what doesn't work, to keep your blood sugar under control. Record:

Many glucose meters let you store this information. Ask your provider about the best way to record this information so they can more easily help you.

You and your provider should set a target goal for your blood sugar levels for different times during the day. If your blood sugar is higher than your goals for 3 days and you don't know why, contact your provider.

Random blood sugar values are often not that useful to your provider and this can be frustrating to people with diabetes. Often fewer values with more information (meal description and time, exercise description and time, medicine dose and time) related to the blood sugar value are much more useful to help guide medicine decisions and dose adjustments.

For people with type 1 diabetes, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends that blood sugar targets be based on a person's needs and goals, including whether they are pregnant and whether they use a CGM device. Talk to your provider and diabetes educator about the best goals for you. General guidelines are:

Before meals, your blood sugar should be:

After meals (1 to 2 hours after eating), your blood sugar should be:

At bedtime, your blood sugar should be:

For people with type 2 diabetes, the ADA also recommends that blood sugar targets be based on a person's needs and goals, including whether they are pregnant and whether they use a CGM device. Talk to your provider and diabetes educator about the best goals for you. General guidelines are:

Before meals, your blood sugar should be:

After meals (1 to 2 hours after eating), your blood sugar should be:

What to do When Your Blood Sugar is High or Low

High blood sugar can harm you. If your blood sugar is high, you need to know how to bring it down. Here are some questions to ask yourself if your blood sugar is high.

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider if your blood sugar is too high or too low and you do not understand why. When your blood sugar is in your target range, you will feel better and your health will be better.

Hyperglycemia - control; Hypoglycemia - control; Diabetes - blood sugar control; Blood glucose - managing

Ahmann AJ, Riddle MC. Therapeutics of type 2 diabetes. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 34.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 6. Glycemic goals, hypoglycemia, and hyperglycemic crises: standards of care in diabetes-2026. Diabetes Care. 2026;49(Supplement_1):S132-S149. PMID: 41358894 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41358894/.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 14. Children and adolescents: standards of care in diabetes-2026. Diabetes Care. 2026;49(Supplement_1):S297-S320. PMID: 41358890 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41358890/.

Dhatariya KK, Umpierrez GE, Crandall JP. Diabetes. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 210.

Gillard P, Atkinson MA, Mathieu C. Type 1 diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 35.

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Healthy living with diabetes. www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/healthy-living-with-diabetes. Reviewed October 2023. Accessed March 3, 2026.

Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
