The Canada occupational health and safety regulations list specific requirements to help employers prevent musculoskeletal injuries. This guide provides guidance to help employers, joint health and safety committees, and worker health and safety representatives implement an effective strategy to help prevent musculoskeletal injuries in the workplace. It includes information that will help you to:

1. Do you lift/lower objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

2. Do you lift or lower objects that are difficult to grasp or hold on to?

3. Do you get into an awkward posture (stooping, reaching) when lifting or lowering?

4. Do you lift objects over a significant height?

5. Do you lift/lower objects while being seated?

6. Do you perform lifting/lowering tasks repeatedly or frequently?

7. Do you carry objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

Ergonomics-related factor: Push or pull

8. Do you push or pull objects?

9. Do you get into awkward postures when pushing (or pulling) objects?

10. Do you grip or grasp objects using significant force?

11. Is awkward posture of the neck or shoulders encountered when gripping tools, equipment or objects?

12. Do you perform tasks repeatedly using the same body part without the opportunity for that body part to rest or recover, resulting in fatigue of the soft tissues in that body area?

Ergonomics-related factor: Work postures - Awkward posture of the neck

13. Do you perform tasks during which your neck gets into awkward postures frequently for a prolonged period (repetitive twisting or bending of the neck, in any direction)?

Ergonomics-related factor: Work postures - Awkward posture of the shoulder

14. Do you perform tasks during which your shoulder gets into awkward postures (elbow away from the side of your torso, in any direction) frequently for a prolonged period?

Ergonomics-related factor: Awkward static (fixed) work posture of the neck or shoulders

15. Do you perform tasks during which your neck or shoulder is held in a static (fixed) awkward position for prolonged periods?

16. Do you experience contact of the neck, shoulder or upper back with an edge?

17. Are your neck, shoulders, or upper back exposed to vibration for prolonged periods?

18. Are your neck, shoulders, or upper back exposed to cold temperatures when performing physical demanding tasks?

19. Are your neck, shoulder, or upper back exposed to hot temperatures when performing physical demanding tasks?

20. Do you lift/lower objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

21. Do you lift or lower objects that are difficult to grasp or hold on to?

22. Are your elbows forearms or hands in awkward posture (e.g. forearm rotated, wrist bent) when lifting or lowering?

23. Do you lift objects over a significant height?

24. Do you lift/lower objects while being seated?

25. Do you perform lifting/lowering tasks repeatedly or frequently?

26. Do you carry objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

Ergonomics-related factor: Push or pull

27. Do you push or pull objects?

28. Are your elbows forearms or hands in awkward posture (e.g. forearm rotated, wrist bent) when pushing or pulling?

29. Do you grip or grasp objects using significant force?

30. Is awkward posture of the wrist (bent wrist) encountered when gripping tools, equipment or objects?

31. Do you perform tasks repeatedly using the same body part without the opportunity for that body part to rest or recover, resulting in fatigue of the soft tissues in that body area?

Ergonomics-related factor: Work postures - Awkward posture of the wrist and forearm

32. Do you perform tasks during which your wrist or forearm gets into awkward postures frequently for a prolonged period (bending of the wrist in any direction, rotation of the forearm)?

33. Do you use tools or perform tasks that involve contact stress on your hand(s)?

34. Do you work with your hands in a cold environment?

35. Do you lift/lower objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

36. Do you lift or lower objects that are difficult to grasp or hold on to?

37. Do you get into an awkward posture (stooping, reaching) when lifting or lowering?

38. Do you lift objects over a significant height?

39. Do you lift/lower objects while being seated?

40. Do you perform lifting/lowering tasks repeatedly or frequently?

41. Do you carry objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

Ergonomics-related factor: Push or pull

42. Do you push or pull objects?

43. Does your lower back get into awkward postures when pushing (or pulling) objects?

44. Do you perform tasks repeatedly that require physical exertion by the lower back without the opportunity for lower back to rest or recover, resulting in fatigue?

Ergonomics-related factor: Work postures - Awkward posture of the lower back

45. Do you perform tasks during which your lower back gets into awkward postures frequently for a prolonged period (bending in any direction or twisting of the trunk)?

Ergonomics-related factor: Awkward static (fixed) work posture of the lower back

46. Do you perform tasks during which your lower back is held in a static (fixed) awkward position for prolonged periods?

47. Are you exposed to whole body vibration for prolonged periods?

48. Do you perform demanding task where you (whole body) are exposed to a cold environment?

49. Do you perform physical demanding task where you (whole body) are exposed to a hot environment?

50. Do you lift/lower objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

51. Do you carry objects that are alive or large or odd-shaped or heavy or unbalanced or that have a shifting centre of gravity, such as a container half filled with water?

Ergonomics-related factor: Push or pull

52. Do you push or pull objects?

Ergonomics-related factor: Work postures - Awkward posture of the lower limb

53. Do you perform tasks that require you to work in a squatting or kneeling position?

54. Are your lower limbs exposed to cold temperatures when performing physical demanding tasks?

55. Are your lower limbs exposed to hot temperatures when performing physical demanding tasks?
