Bank accounts, debit cards, online banking, deposit insurance, branch closures and more.

How to choose a financial institution that meets your needs and other considerations.

Opening a bank account, the identification you need and your right to receive information.

Choosing an account type (chequing, savings, joint), including low-cost and no-cost accounts.

Transferring your products and services

How to transfer your accounts, loans, credit card, mortgage, registered products to another financial institution.

Choosing financial products and services that are right for you

Types of financial products and services and how you can use them.

Online banking, mobile banking and protecting your banking information online.

What deposit insurance protects and how much it covers.

Fees for withdrawing money from an ATM and how to save on fees.

Setting up or cancelling a pre-authorized debit and how to report a pre-authorized debit that you did not approve.

The steps to take if you find a transaction that you did not make.

Access to the first $100 and how long a financial institution can hold the money you deposit.

Cashing a Government of Canada cheque

Cashing a Government of Canada cheque for free at any bank and what to do with an old cheque.

What is an unclaimed bank balance and how to check if you have any.

How debit cards work, fees, PINs and unauthorized debits.

Compare bank account interest rates, monthly fees, transaction fees and services.

When a financial institution can take money from your account

What is the right of offset, how it works and how to prevent your account from being offset.

How overdraft protection works, costs, limits and what you need to qualify.

The risks of using fintech apps and how you can protect your personal information.

Depositing a cheque with your mobile device

How to deposit a cheque with your mobile device, security and alternatives.

What is open banking, how it works, benefits, and screen scraping.

What is AI, possible risks, how it may be used and limitations of protection in Canada.

When and how a bank must notify you if your branch is closing.
