Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) damages your lungs. This can make it hard for you to get enough oxygen and clear carbon dioxide from your lungs. While there is no cure for COPD, you can do many things to regulate your symptoms and make your life better.

Below are some questions you may want to ask your health care provider to help you take care of your lungs.

What will make my COPD worse?

What are some signs that my breathing is getting worse and I should contact my provider? What should I do when I feel I am not breathing well enough?

Am I taking my COPD medicines the right way?

What sort of changes should I make around my home?

What sort of changes do I need to make at work?

What shots or vaccinations do I need?

Do I need oxygen? If yes, do I need it all times?

Are there changes in my diet that will help my COPD?

What do I need to do when I am planning to travel?

What are some exercises I can do to keep my muscles strong, even if I cannot walk around very much?

Should I consider pulmonary rehabilitation?

How can I save some of my energy around the house?

Am I at higher risk for COVID-19 or other illness? How should I protect myself?

What to ask your doctor about COPD; Emphysema - what to ask your doctor; Chronic bronchitis - what to ask your doctor; Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - what to ask your doctor

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. About COPD. www.cdc.gov/copd/about/index.html. Updated May 15, 2024. Accessed November 7, 2024.

Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) website. Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 2024 report. goldcopd.org/2024-gold-report/. Accessed November 7, 2024.

Waters A, Kaiksow FA. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn's Current Therapy 2024. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:915-921.

Updated by: Frank D. Brodkey, MD, FCCM, Associate Professor, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
