To work in Croatia under the Memorandum of Understanding on Youth Mobility, you must:

Other requirements may apply. Check Croatia’s website for more details.

What type of work visa do I need?

You need to apply for a temporary stay permit to stay in Croatia for longer than 90 days. To participate, you must be a:

You need to register at the relevant police precinct or police department within 3 days of entering Croatia.

You’ll also need a work permit to legally work in Croatia. Applications for a work permit are initiated by the employer.

Do I need a formal job or internship offer?

Yes, you need a job offer (pre-arranged contract of employment) or a formal internship offer if you apply to:

No, you don’t need one if you are applying to travel to Croatia and work temporarily to help fund your trip.

How long can I stay and work?

You can stay and work in Croatia for up to 12 months each stay.

You can participate in Croatia’s Working Holiday Program twice with a mandatory 3 month break between participations.

Croatia is shaped like a horseshoe with wide plains, mountainous regions and a long indented sunny coastline with over a thousand islands. Almost ten percent of the country is protected within eleven nature parks, eight national parks and two strict nature reserves. There are also eight United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites in Croatia.

There are many ways to experience the magic of Croatia. Roam the centuries-old cobbled streets, discovering UNESCO sites as you go. Spend some time by the beautiful turquoise waters of the Adriatic Sea as you sail the many Islands of Croatia or hike, cycle or raft along one of the eight stunning national parks.

Croatia offers a varied range of food, largely because the country straddles two distinctive culinary regions, the seafood-dominated food of the Mediterranean and the schnitzel-and-strudel style of Central Europe.

The best way to make sure your trip is the experience of a lifetime is to plan. Review our travel checklist to find out what you should know or do before travelling to and working in a foreign country.

Before you leave, remember to register as a Canadian abroad to receive notifications in case of an emergency while you are abroad or of a personal emergency at home. The service also enables you to receive important information before or during a natural disaster or civil unrest.

Need help planning? One of IEC’s recognized organizations might be able to help you find a job, transportation, and provide travel advice.

Most recognized organizations charge a fee for their services.

Living and working in Croatia (PDF, 3.60 MB)

Safety and travel advice for 2SLGBTQI+ travellers

You can apply in person at the Croatian Embassy in Ottawa or Croatia’s Consulate General in Mississauga.

You can also apply in person in Croatia, at the local police station for the area where you plan to live.
