Learn about what you should do if you have a problem with a bank. Learn how to use their complaint-handling process and what to do if you’re not satisfied.

If you have a problem with a bank, you should file a complaint with them directly. The Financial Consumer Agency of Canada (FCAC) does not resolve individual complaints. FCAC can help you understand a bank’s complaint process and guide you through the steps.

Prepare to file your complaint

Before you file your complaint, take some time to gather your information. This will help you clearly explain what went wrong and how you want the bank to fix the issue.

You’ll want to write down:

Be informed and ready. Make sure you read about your rights when filing a complaint with your bank.

Learn more about your rights when filing a complaint with your bank.

Find your bank’s complaint-handling process

Each bank has its own complaint-handling process.

You can usually find it:

Your bank must give you that information and explain how to move your complaint through each step.

Complaint processes vary between banks. You can usually expect 2 internal steps to resolve your complaint.

Contact your bank to file your complaint

Contact your bank about your complaint. You may be able to do this:

Explain the problem and provide any supporting details or documents.

Take notes. Always write down the conversation dates, the employee names and what you discussed.

Your bank must provide you with a detailed written response within 56 calendar days from when you first made the complaint.

A detailed written response also applies if they close your complaint and you’re not satisfied with the proposed solution.

Contact the Ombudsman for Banking Services and Investments

If you’re not satisfied with the proposed solution, let your bank know. You can generally escalate your complaint within the bank. Follow your bank’s complaint-handling process to see what to do next.

You also have the right to escalate your complaint to the Ombudsman for Banking Services and Investments (OBSI). OBSI is an external and independent organization.

It provides a free and impartial review of complaints between consumers and banks. It may recommend a solution to help resolve the situation between you and your bank.

You may contact OBSI on the earlier of these dates:

If your complaint is not within its terms of reference, OBSI must advise you in writing within 30 calendar days.

OBSI must make a final written recommendation within 120 calendar days after receiving the information needed to deal with your complaint.

Contact the Ombudsman for Banking Services and Investments (OBSI).

If the issue is still not resolved to your satisfaction, you can consult with a legal professional to explore other options.

There may be an associated cost.

Use these timelines to track your complaint:

If you decide to escalate your complaint to OBSI:

Find your provincial or territorial regulator

You may need to take your complaint to a provincial or territorial regulator. For example, if you’re dealing with a provincial credit union, their process may differ from the above.

Contact your provincial or territorial regulator to learn more about their complaint-handling process.

Find your provincial or territorial regulator.

You may contact FCAC’s Consumer Information Centre to better understand the complaint process. Representatives are ready to help.

Learn how to contact FCAC's Consumer Information Centre.
