Why emergency funds are important

An emergency fund is money you set aside to pay for unexpected expenses. You may have to deal with an emergency or an unexpected situation at some point in your lifetime.

These surprises usually don’t give you time to adjust your budget.

Don’t confuse unexpected expenses with occasional expenses such as school supplies, winter tires or holiday expenses. Occasional expenses should already be planned for in your budget.

Setting up an emergency fund helps you to:

Tips to set up an emergency fund

Use the following tips to set up an emergency fund.

It’s important that you choose the right type of account to build your emergency fund. It should be easy to access your money quickly in case of an emergency.

You should look for a savings account that:

Contact your financial institution to find out the different account options they offer. Make sure the account you choose will allow you to meet your goal to build an emergency fund.

Use the Account Comparison Tool to find the savings account that best suits your needs.

Start by saving a realistic amount

It can take months or years to reach the desired amount for your emergency fund.

It’s better to start with a small amount so that you don’t get discouraged.

Start by figuring out what you can put aside every week. Whether it’s $50, $20, $5 or some small change, the important thing is to start right now.

Ideally, you should try to save the equivalent of 3 to 6 months of your regular expenses. You can also aim to save 3 to 6 months of income. Both methods work, so choose the one that is easier for you.

These amounts can sometimes seem out of reach. That is why you should save gradually.

Saving a small amount on a regular basis can make a big difference in the long term.

Figure 1: The progression of various savings amounts

The savings amounts in this example are for illustration purposes only. They don’t include the interest you may earn or take into account any tax implications.

Use the Budget Planner to include emergency savings into your budget.

Incorporate savings into your daily habits.

Choose a savings amount, date and frequency to build your savings. Then, set up an automatic transfer from your regular account to your savings account.

You can set up your automatic transfer on the days you get paid. This way, the amount saved will be transferred as soon as your paycheque is deposited into your account.

Eliminate an expense and save the amount

Eliminate some expenses and add these amounts to your emergency fund. This won’t affect your current budget and your fund will grow faster.

To determine the expenses you can eliminate, identify the difference between your needs and wants.

Depending on your current habits, you could save a lot of money every day.

Learn how to make a budget and eliminate expenses.

Review your financial goals on a regular basis. Your family, personal or work situation may change, and this may affect your budget.

Even minor changes can have an impact on the time you’ll need to reach your emergency savings goal.

When these events occur, modify your budget accordingly so that your emergency fund remains a priority.

Take advantage of every opportunity that can help you increase your emergency fund. Deposit any additional amount into your savings account whenever possible.

For example, you may get extra money if you:

When you finish paying off any type of loan, it’s a great opportunity to increase your emergency fund. Take the money you were putting towards your monthly payments and deposit them into your savings account instead.

These payments are already in your budget. This is a great way to put the newly available money to good use.

Tips to help you use an emergency fund

Before using all or part of your emergency fund, determine if you’re really experiencing an emergency. Maybe the expense is something you can put off until you’ve had the opportunity to save.

If you’re not sure, go back to your list of needs and wants. An emergency is a major and sudden need that’s not part of your current budget and that’s unplanned.

When it’s truly an emergency, don’t hesitate to use your emergency fund. The purpose of an emergency fund is to avoid having to use other expensive credit options.

While your emergency fund should be easy to access, don’t let yourself be tempted by this money. Leave it intact for a real emergency.
