Older adults and people with medical problems are at risk of falling or tripping. This can result in broken bones or more serious injuries. The bathroom is a place in the home where falls most often happen. Making changes in your bathroom helps lower your risk of falling.

What to Consider at Home

Staying safe in the bathroom is important for people with joint pain, muscle weakness, or physical disability. If you have any of these issues, you will need to take precautions in your bathroom. Remove all floor coverings and anything that blocks the entry.

To protect yourself when you take a bath or shower:

Always urinate sitting down and don't get up suddenly after urinating.

Raising the toilet seat height can help prevent falls. You can do this by adding an elevated toilet seat. You can also use a commode chair instead of a toilet.

Consider a special seat called a portable bidet. It helps you clean your bottom without using your hands. It sprays warm water to clean, then warm air to dry.

Safety Bars for the Bath and Toilet

You may need to have safety bars in your bathroom. These grab bars should be secured vertically or horizontally to the wall, not diagonally.

Do not use towel racks as grab bars. They can't support your weight.

You will need two grab bars: one to help you get in and out of the tub, and another to help you stand from a sitting position.

When to Call the Doctor

If you are not sure what changes you need to make in your bathroom, ask your health care provider for a referral to an occupational or physical therapist. The therapist can visit your bathroom and make safety recommendations.

Older adult bathroom safety; Falls - bathroom safety

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. About older adult fall prevention. www.cdc.gov/falls/about/index.html. Updated January 27, 2026. Accessed April 20, 2026.

National Institute on Aging website. Preventing falls at home: room by room. www.nia.nih.gov/health/falls-and-falls-prevention/preventing-falls-home-room-room. Updated September 12, 2022. Accessed April 20, 2026.

Studenski S, Van Swearingen JV. Falls. In: Fillit HM, Rockwood K, Young J, eds. Brocklehurst's Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2017:chap 103.

Updated by: Frank D. Brodkey, MD, FCCM, Associate Professor, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
