​Insurance companies will pay for the specific losses described in your policy.

Check your policy’s terms and conditions for the following:

Before you make a car or home insurance claim, consider the following:

For example, suppose you make a claim for $600 but you have a $500 deductible. In such a case, your insurance will only reimburse you $100. Your premiums may also increase when you renew your insurance. You may pay more in premiums over the long term than the $100 you save by making a claim.

Steps to take to make a claim

If you decide to make a claim, contact your insurance agent, broker or company as soon as possible. Most insurance companies have time limits within which you must submit your claim. The limit usually varies from 90 days to 12 months from the date of the loss or event. Check your policy’s terms and conditions for the time limit.

Provide your insurance agent, broker or company with all supporting documents required by your policy.

For example, you may need to provide:

Your insurance company will review your policy. They will let you know if you can make a claim under the terms of your contract.

In some cases, the insurance company may look into the circumstances surrounding your claim. This is to confirm that it involves no fraud. This is a claim investigation. During a claim investigation, your insurance company may ask you to provide:

Your insurance company will use this information to determine if it will pay your claim.

Making a claim on old or lost policies

To make a claim on an old or lost life insurance policy that belonged to a deceased family member or loved one you must locate the lost policy. To help you do this:

What to do if your claim is denied or your payment is delayed

Get help if you have questions about a denied claim or a delayed payment.

Life and health insurance matters

Your insurance company may deny your claim within the contestability period.

If you want to discuss your claim, contact the head office of your insurance company.

If you're not satisfied with the response, contact the OLHI or your provincial or territorial regulator.

How to make a complaint about your insurance provider.

Home or car insurance matters

If your insurance company denies your claim or delays your payment, contact the Insurance Bureau of Canada.

You can also make a formal complaint or get legal help.
