Pressure injuries are also called bedsores, or pressure sores. They can form when your skin and soft tissue press against a harder surface, such as a chair or bed, for a prolonged time. This pressure reduces blood supply to that area. Lack of blood supply can cause the skin tissue in this area to become damaged or die. When this happens, a pressure injury may occur.

You have a risk of developing a pressure injury if you:

You will need to take steps to prevent these problems.

You, or your caregiver, need to check your body every day from head to toe. Pay special attention to the areas where pressure injuries often occur. These areas are the:

Contact your health care provider if you see early signs of pressure injuries. These signs are:

Treat your skin gently to help prevent pressure injuries. You can do this by:

Eat enough calories and protein to stay healthy.

Drink plenty of water every day.

Make sure your clothes are not increasing your risk of developing pressure injuries by:

After urinating or having a bowel movement:

Ask your provider about creams or other medicines to help protect your skin in this area.

If You Use a Wheelchair

Make sure your wheelchair is the right size for you. Have your provider or physical therapist check the fit of your wheelchair once or twice a year, especially if you gain weight or feel pressure anywhere.

Sit on a foam or gel seat cushion that fits your wheelchair. Natural sheepskin pads are also helpful to reduce pressure on the skin. Do not sit on a donut-shaped cushions.

You or your caregiver should shift your weight (lean forward, left and right) in your wheelchair every 15 to 20 minutes. This will take pressure off certain areas and maintain blood flow.

If you transfer yourself (move to or from your wheelchair), lift your body up with your arms. Do not drag yourself. If you are having trouble transferring into your wheelchair, ask a physical therapist to teach you the proper technique.

If your caregiver transfers you, make sure they know the proper way to move you.

When You Are in Bed

Use a foam mattress or one that is filled with gel or air. Place pads under your bottom to absorb wetness to help keep your skin dry.

Use a soft pillow or a piece of soft foam between parts of your body that press against each other or against your mattress.

When you are lying on your side, put a pillow or a piece of foam between your knees and ankles.

When you are lying on your back, put a pillow or a piece of foam:

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider right away if:

Talk to your provider if you have questions about pressure injuries and how to prevent them.

Decubitus ulcer prevention; Bedsore prevention; Pressure sores prevention; Pressure ulcer prevention

James WD. Dermatoses resulting from physical factors. In: James WD, ed. Andrews' Diseases of the Skin. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 3.

Qaseem A, Humphrey LL, Forciea MA, Starkey M, Denberg TD. Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Treatment of pressure ulcers: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(5):370-379. PMID: 25732279 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25732279/.

Walston JD. Common clinical sequelae of aging. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 24.

Woelfel SL, Armstrong DG, Shin L. Wound care. In: Sidawy AN, Perler BA, eds. Rutherford's Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 118.

Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
