It can be a challenge to make healthy choices during special occasions and events that involve food. Use these strategies to make healthy choices.

Food plays an important role during holidays and events

Most people think of traditional holidays as the time they celebrate by gathering with friends and family to enjoy food. There are actually many more frequent events where we celebrate with food. Think about:

These occasions have many benefits. They allow you to:

Sometimes, the food and drinks offered and consumed at these events are:

It’s important to remember that the foods you eat regularly at these events are a part of your eating pattern.

5 strategies for healthy eating

Use these 5 strategies to help you make healthier food choices during the holidays or other social events.

As much as possible, stick to healthy foods you would normally choose. This applies when you are:

Preparing dishes with these foods can help ensure you are providing and making a healthier choice.

Special holiday versions of highly processed foods are often available and on sale during the holidays. Where possible, limit these and other highly processed foods. If you choose these foods, choose them in smaller amounts.

Usually during celebrations or events there is a lot going on. It is easy to get distracted while eating.

Think about your habits at social gatherings. Remember to:

It’s important that you enjoy your food. This is especially true during holidays and events when the food that’s offered or served may serve a cultural or traditional purpose. Eating foods you like without judgment can help you develop a healthy attitude about food.

Instead of feeling like you are missing out when it comes to less healthy food choices, have a smaller portion and take the time to savour it.

Drinks can add additional calories, sodium, sugars or saturated fat to your meal. This is true for non-alcoholic as well as alcoholic drinks.

Enjoy carbonated water with added flavour from fruit. Plain coffee and tea can also be an option.

Celebrate with an activity. Try:

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
