Older adults and people with medical problems are at risk of falling or tripping. This can result in broken bones or more serious injuries.

Use the tips below to make changes in the home to prevent falls.

What to Expect at Home

Falls can happen anywhere. This includes inside and outside the home. Take action to prevent falls, such as setting up a safe home, avoiding things that can cause falls, and exercising to build strength and balance.

Have a bed that is low, so that your feet touch the floor when you sit on the edge of the bed.

Keep tripping hazards out of your home by:

Have good lighting, especially for the path from the bedroom to the bathroom and in the bathroom and any stairs.

Stay safe in the bathroom by:

Reorganize the home so things are easier to reach. Keep a cordless or cell phone with you so you have it when you need to make or receive calls.

Set up your home so that you do not have to climb steps by:

If you do not have a caregiver, ask your health care provider about having someone come to your home to check for safety problems.

Weak muscles that make it more difficult to stand up or keep your balance are a common cause of falls. Balance problems can also cause falls.

When you walk, avoid sudden movements or changes in position. Wear shoes with low heels that fit well. Rubber soles can help keep you from slipping. Stay away from water or ice on sidewalks.

Do not stand on step ladders or chairs to reach things.

Ask your provider about medicines you may be taking that can make you dizzy. Your provider may be able to make some medicine changes that could reduce falls.

Ask your provider about a cane or walker. If you use a walker, attach a small basket to it to keep your phone and other important items in it. A walker with an inbuilt seat will allow you to sit and rest while walking if you need to.

Exercise to Help Build Your Strength

When you stand up from a sitting position, go slowly. Hold on to something stable. If you are having problems getting up, ask your provider about seeing a physical therapist. The therapist can show you how to build your strength and balance to make getting up and walking easier.

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider if you have fallen, or if you almost fall. Also contact your provider if your eyesight has worsened. Improving your vision will help reduce falls.

Home safety; Safety in the home; Fall prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. About older adult fall prevention. www.cdc.gov/falls/about/index.html. Updated January 27, 2026. Accessed April 21, 2026.

Studenski S, Swearingen JV. Falls. In: Fillit HM, Rockwood K, Young J, eds. Brocklehurst's Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 103.

US Preventive Services Task Force, Nicholson WK, Silverstein M, et al. Interventions to prevent falls in community-dwelling older adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2024;332(1):51-57. PMID: 38833246 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38833246/.

Walston JD. Common clinical sequelae of aging. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 24.

Updated by: Frank D. Brodkey, MD, FCCM, Associate Professor, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
