To work in Hong Kong through the Working Holiday Scheme, you must:

Other requirements may apply, check Hong Kong’s website for more details.

What type of work visa do I need?

You need to apply for a Working Holiday Visa.

Do I need a formal job or internship offer?

No, you do not need a formal job offer (pre-arranged contract of employment) or a formal internship offer.

How long can I stay and work?

You can stay and work in Hong Kong for up to 12 months.

You can participate in the Working Holiday Scheme once.

Hong Kong is considered the Pearl of the Orient. Although Cantonese is the primary language used in Hong Kong, English is also widely used and is considered one of the official languages. Hong Kong is unique as it is a modern world-class city yet rooted in rich traditional values and customs. As one of the top trading economies in the world, Hong Kong is world renowned for its free trade economy with low tax rates and minimum government intervention.

For nature lovers, Hong Kong has a wide range of hiking areas and beaches which are just a short journey away from the busy urban streets. Hong Kong also offers popular theme parks such as Ocean Park and Hong Kong Disneyland Resort.

You can also explore the traditional side of Hong Kong by visiting the Wong Tai Sin Temple or stroll through an array of street markets like Temple Street night market or the Ladies' Market.

For the foodies, Hong Kong is well-known as a food paradise. It offers a wide range of delicacies, from international to regional Chinese cuisines like dim sum or local treats like egg tarts and Hong Kong style milk tea.

The best way to make sure your trip is the experience of a lifetime is to plan. Review our travel checklist to find out what you should know or do before travelling to and working in a foreign country.

Before you leave, remember to register as a Canadian abroad to receive notifications in case of an emergency while you are abroad or of a personal emergency at home. The service also enables you to receive important information before or during a natural disaster or civil unrest.

Need help planning? One of IEC’s recognized organizations might be able to help you find a job, transportation, and provide travel advice.

Most recognized organizations charge a fee for their services.

Check out Hong Kong’s Working Holiday Guide

Hong Kong’s Working Holiday Guide

This guide provides tips and resources on working in Hong Kong.

Living and working in Hong Kong

Safety and travel advice for 2SLGBTQI+ travellers
