This month we feature: connecting with others through food during the holiday season

This sweet berry brunch bake is a crowd-pleaser. It's easy to make and fun to decorate.

Holiday tip: top with pumpkin seeds instead of almonds to showcase bright, festive colours.

The holiday season is the perfect time to enjoy comforting flavours and share meaningful moments around food. Whether during a festive meal or just sharing a simple snack, food brings us together and creates connections.

Celebrating with food during holidays and special events offers many benefits. It's an opportunity to:

Sometimes, the food and drinks offered and consumed at celebrations are:

Eating foods you like without judgment can help you develop a healthy attitude about food.

Instead of feeling like you are missing out when it comes to less healthy food choices, have a smaller portion and take the time to savour it.

Being mindful of your eating habits

Being mindful about how you eat can help you enjoy the experience and make choices that support your health. Try these tips to help you be mindful of your eating habits this holiday season:

Pay attention to the aromas, textures, and flavours of your food. Being mindful helps you truly enjoy each bite.

Find a spot to relax and focus on your meal instead of eating on the go.

Pay attention to your choices

Notice your hunger and fullness cues.

Being mindful of your eating habits isn't about restriction; it's about connection.

These small habits can help you enjoy the festive season with others and connect over foods that support health, culture, and tradition.

Healthy eating recommendation of the month

Enjoying healthy foods with family, friends, neighbours or co-workers is a great way to connect and add enjoyment to your life.

Translated food guide snapshot of the month

Canada's food guide is a suite of online resources made to meet different needs. It includes the food guide snapshot, available online in many languages.

This month, discover the snapshot in Vietnamese.

In January, we'll explore tips to building healthier habits.

Originally published: December 1, 2025
