For all essential travel, check travel advisories and requirements before you leave Canada.

Follow all additional local public health measures while travelling.

Stay informed when you return to Canada.

To work in the United Kingdom (UK) under the Youth Mobility Scheme, you must:

Other requirements may apply. Check the UK website for more details.

What type of work visa do I need?

You need to apply for a Youth Mobility Scheme visa.

With this visa, you can change jobs and work most job types during your stay.

Learn more about what you can and can’t do with this visa, including what jobs you can’t hold, by checking the UK website.

Do I need a formal job or internship offer?

No, you don't need a formal job offer (pre-arranged contract of employment) or a formal internship offer.

How long can I stay and work?

You can participate in the UK’s Youth Mobility Scheme once for up to 36 months.

Your visa lets you live and work in the UK for up to 24 months. You can then apply to extend your visa for an additional 12 months if you

The United Kingdom (UK) combines Northern Ireland, England, Scotland and Wales. The UK is home to many different cultures, with more than 160 nationalities speaking more than 300 different languages.

The UK has sprawling hills, misty moors, sandy coves, rugged coastlines and winding country roads as far as the eye can see. Some of the most iconic ancient woodlands and rural terrains in Europe can be found here.

There's always something exciting happening in Britain, from sightseeing tours of London’s landmarks to uncovering centuries of history at one of the many castles or museums. Enjoy a traditional afternoon tea, go camping in the hills or hiking in one of 15 national parks.

The UK is home to the world famous Big Ben, Tower Bridge, Neolithic Stonehenge, Roman Baths complex and centuries-old Oxford and Cambridge Universities.

The best way to make sure your trip is the experience of a lifetime is to plan. Review our travel checklist to find out what you should know or do before travelling to and working in a foreign country.

Before you leave, remember to register as a Canadian abroad to receive notifications in case of an emergency while you are abroad or of a personal emergency at home. The service also enables you to receive important information before or during a natural disaster or civil unrest.

Need help planning? One of IEC’s recognized organizations might be able to help you find a job, transportation, and provide travel advice.

Most recognized organizations charge a fee for their services.

Safety and travel advice for 2SLGBTQI+ travellers
