Although no child is injury proof, parents can take simple steps to keep their children from getting head injuries.

Your child should wear a seatbelt at all times when they are in a car or other motor vehicle.

Do not drive with a child in your car when you have been drinking alcohol, used illegal drugs, taking medicines that make you sleepy, or are feeling very tired.

Helmets help to prevent head injuries. Your child should wear a helmet that fits properly for the following sports or activities:

Your local sporting goods store, sports facility, or bike shop will be able to help make certain the helmet fits properly. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration also has information on how to fit a bike helmet.

Almost all major medical organizations recommend against boxing of any sort, even with a helmet.

Older children should always wear a helmet when riding a snowmobile, motorcycle, scooter, or all-terrain vehicle (ATV). If possible, children should not ride on these vehicles.

After having a concussion or mild head injury, your child may need a helmet. Be sure to talk with your health care provider about when your child can return to activities.

Keeping Your Child Safe in the Home

Install window guards on all windows that can be opened.

Use a safety gate at the top and the bottom of stairs until your child can safely go up and down. Keep stairs free of any clutter. Do not let your children play on stairs or jump on or from furniture.

Do not leave a young infant alone on a high place such as a bed or sofa. When using a high chair, make sure your child is strapped in with the safety harness.

Store all firearms and ammunitions in a locked cabinet.

Make sure playground surfaces are safe. They should be made of shock-absorbing material, such as rubber mulch.

Keep your children away from trampolines, if possible.

Some simple steps can keep your child safe in bed:

Concussion - preventing in children; Traumatic brain injury - preventing in children; TBI - children; Safety - preventing head injury

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Concussion basics. www.cdc.gov/headsup/basics/index.html. Updated April 5, 2024. Accessed August 12, 2024.

Johnston BD, Kendi S. Injury control. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 14.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration website. Car seats and booster seats. www.nhtsa.gov/equipment/car-seats-and-booster-seats#35091. Accessed August 12, 2024.

Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M.
