To work in Austria through a bilateral Youth Mobility program, you must:

Other requirements may apply. Check Austria’s website for more details.

What type of work visa do I need?

Eligible applicants can apply for one of three Youth Mobility programs:

Young professionals employed in Canada who want to travel to receive or provide training from a partner company in Austria.

Post-secondary graduates who want professional training in tourism, agriculture or forestry. Participants must have a degree or diploma in at least one of the three fields.

Canadian youth looking to travel to Austria and work temporarily to fund your trip.

Do I need a formal job or internship offer?

Yes, you need a job offer (pre-arranged contract of employment) or a formal internship offer if you apply to the:

No, you don’t need one if you apply to the Working Holiday Programme.

How long can I stay and work?

If you are taking part in the:

While most of Austria is mountainous, the landscape offers a lot of variety with snowy peaks, glaciers, many lakes and rivers, wide basins, vineyards and green hills and plains. Because of this, Austrians, like Canadians, embrace an outdoor lifestyle that includes hiking, mountain climbing and water sports and, of course, some of the best skiing in the world.

Austria is rich with tradition and culture. It’s common for many Austrians to wear traditional dress, such as a Dirndl (dress with apron) or Lederhosen (short leather pants), when the occasion is right. Food is a big part of Austrian culture. If you’re a fan of desserts, make sure to try a piece of Sachertorte or Apfelstrudel. Austria’s history in music is as impressive as any. Names like Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert are just a few famous composers connected to Austrian music.

Need help planning? One of IEC’s recognized organizations might be able to help you find a job, transportation, and provide travel advice.

Most recognized organizations charge a fee for their services.

The best way to make sure your trip is the experience of a lifetime is to plan. Review our travel checklist to find out what you should know or do before travelling to and working in a foreign country.

Before you leave, remember to register as a Canadian abroad to receive notifications in case of an emergency while you are abroad or of a personal emergency at home. The service also enables you to receive important information before or during a natural disaster or civil unrest.

Living and working in Austria

Safety and travel advice for 2SLGBTQI+ travellers
