The foods available in your community can impact your food choices. Learn how to find, choose and promote healthy foods and drinks in your community.

Having healthy food choices in your community matters

Community spaces are important gathering places. They provide a safe space for residents to play, learn and participate in activities. Some community land may also provide a place to grow or harvest food. These spaces include:

Food and drinks are often offered or sold in these places, which can have an impact on the health of the residents.

Community spaces can shape people’s eating habits positively by:

It’s important to have healthy food choices available no matter where you are, as these choices can shape your eating pattern.

How to make healthy choices in your community

There are many strategies you can use to help you make healthy choices in your community.

Pack your own meal or snacks to have available if you get hungry. That way you know you’ll have something healthy to eat. It can also help you cut down on the chances of having to buy less healthy food.

Always carry a reusable water bottle with you in case you get thirsty.

If it’s not possible to bring your own food, think ahead to where you will be. Find out what healthy food options are available where you are going or close by. This can help prevent you from having to choose meals or snacks that can be less healthy out of convenience.

Buying and eating food outside the home can add a lot of extra waste, especially from food packaging and eating utensils. If you know you’ll be eating a meal, think about what you can bring to cut down on waste. Consider packing:

Explore places you can grow or harvest your own food

Growing or harvesting your own food can be a great way to enjoy healthy, in-season options. Depending on where you live, you may be able to:

Find out about community programs

Many communities have programs that offer healthy foods for free or at affordable prices.

There may also be programs in your community that focus on teaching food skills.

Your local community centre can be a good place to learn about the programs that are available.

Creating an environment that supports healthy eating habits

Everyone can play a role in creating a healthy food environment in their community.

As a community member you can:

If you are responsible for food at community events or spaces:

Be a part of community planning discussions. Well planned communities make it easier and more convenient for people to make healthy food choices. There are many ways a community can support healthy eating such as:

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
