When you have diabetes, you need to control your blood sugar (glucose). Insulin or diabetes medicines help lower your blood sugar. In general, exercise also lowers your blood sugar.

Food raises your blood sugar the most but stress, certain medicines, and some kinds of exercise can also raise your blood sugar.

The three major nutrients in food are carbohydrates, protein, and fat.

If you have diabetes, you may need to eat carbohydrate snacks during the day. This will help balance your blood sugar. This is particularly important if you have type 1 diabetes. Some people with type 2 diabetes who take insulin or other medicines that can cause low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) may also benefit from eating snacks during the day.

Learning how to count the carbohydrates that you eat (carb counting) helps you plan what to eat. It will also help keep your blood sugar under control.

Your health care provider may tell you to eat a snack at certain times of the day, most often at bedtime. This helps keep your blood sugar from getting too low at night. Other times, you may have a snack before or during exercise for the same reason. Ask your provider about the snacks you can and you can't have.

Needing to snack to prevent low blood sugar has become much less common because of new types of insulin that are better at matching the insulin your body needs at specific times.

If you have type 2 diabetes and are taking insulin and often need to snack during the day and are gaining weight, your doses of insulin may be too high and you should talk to your provider about this.

You will also need to ask about what snacks to avoid.

Your provider can tell you if you should snack at certain times to keep from having low blood sugar.

This will be based on your:

Most often, your snacks will be easy to digest foods that have 15 to 45 grams (g) of carbohydrates.

Snack foods that have 15 g of carbohydrates are:

Having diabetes does not mean that you must stop eating snacks. It does mean that you should know what a snack does to your blood sugar. You also need to know what healthy snacks are so you can choose a snack that will not raise your blood sugar or make you gain weight. Ask your provider about what snacks you can eat. Also ask if you need to change your treatment (such as taking extra insulin shots) for snacks.

Snacks with no carbohydrates change your blood sugar the least. The healthiest snacks usually do not have many calories.

Read food labels for carbohydrates and calories. You can also use carbohydrate counting apps or books. Over time, it will get easier for you to tell how many carbohydrates are in foods or snacks.

Some low carbohydrate snacks, such as nuts and seeds, are high in calories. Some low carbohydrate snacks are:

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider if your blood sugar is too high or too low and you do not understand why. When your blood sugar is in your target range, you will feel better and your health will be better.

Healthy snacking - diabetes; Low blood sugar - snacking; Hypoglycemia - snacking

Ahmann AJ, Riddle MC. Therapeutics of type 2 diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 34.

American Diabetes Association website. Carb counting and diabetes. diabetes.org/food-nutrition/understanding-carbs/carb-counting-and-diabetes. Accessed March 3, 2026.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 5. Facilitating positive health behaviors and well-being to improve health outcomes: standards of care in diabetes-2026. Diabetes Care. 2026;49(Supplement_1):S89-S131. PMID: 41358898 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41358898/.

Dhatariya KK, Umpierrez GE, Crandall JP. Diabetes. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 210.

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Healthy living with diabetes. www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/healthy-living-with-diabetes. Reviewed October 2023. Accessed March 3, 2026.

Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
