You had laparoscopic gastric banding. This surgery made your stomach smaller by closing off part of your stomach with an adjustable band. After surgery you will eat less food, and you will not be able to eat quickly.

Your health care provider will teach you about foods you can eat and foods you should avoid. It is very important to follow these diet guidelines.

When You Go Home From the Hospital

You will eat only liquid or pureed food for 2 to 3 weeks after your surgery. You will slowly add in soft foods, and then regular foods.

When you start eating solid foods again, you will feel full more quickly. Just a few bites of solid food may fill you up. This is because your new stomach pouch holds only a tablespoonful of food at first, about the size of a walnut.

Your pouch may get larger over time. You do not want to stretch it out, so do not eat more than your provider advises. When your pouch is larger, it may not hold more than about 1 cup (250 milliliters) of chewed food.

You may lose weight over the first 3 to 6 months after surgery. During this time, you may have:

These symptoms are normal. They should go away as your body gets used to your weight loss.

A New Way of Eating

Remember to eat slowly and chew each bite very slowly and completely. Do not swallow food until it is smooth. The opening between your new stomach pouch and the large part of the stomach is small. Food that is not chewed well can block this opening.

Some foods you eat may cause some pain or discomfort if you do not chew them completely. Some of these are pasta, rice, bread, raw vegetables, and meats, especially steak. It may be better to stay away from these types of foods, and you should get advice from your provider about this. Adding a low-fat sauce, such as a broth gravy, can make them easier to digest. Other foods that may cause discomfort are dry foods, such as popcorn and nuts, or fibrous foods, such as celery and corn.

You will need to drink up to 8 cups (64 ounces), or 2 liters, of water or other calorie-free liquids every day:

You will need to make sure you are getting enough protein, vitamins, and minerals while you are losing weight. Eating mostly protein, fruits, vegetables, and whole grains will help your body get the nutrients it needs.

Protein may be the most important of these foods. Your body needs protein to build muscles and other body tissues. Low-fat protein choices include:

Combining foods with texture together with protein helps people who have a gastric band stay satisfied longer. This includes things like a salad with grilled chicken or toast with low-fat cottage cheese.

Because you are eating less, your body may not be getting enough of some important vitamins and minerals. Your provider may prescribe these supplements:

You will need to have regular checkups to keep track of your weight and to make sure you are eating well. These visits are a good time to talk about any problems you are having with your diet, or about other issues related to your surgery and recovery.

Read food labels to avoid high-calorie foods. It is important to get as many nutrients as you can without eating too many calories.

If you gain weight or your weight loss is slower than expected, ask yourself:

When to Call the Doctor

Gastric banding surgery - your diet; Obesity - diet after banding; Weight loss - diet after banding

Heber D, Greenway FL, Kaplan LM, et al. Endocrine and nutritional management of the post-bariatric surgery patient: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95(11):4823-4843. PMID: 21051578 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21051578/.

Mechanick JI, Apovian C, Brethauer S, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of patients undergoing bariatric procedures - 2019 update: cosponsored by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/American College of Endocrinology, the Obesity Society, American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery, Obesity Medicine Association, and American Society of Anesthesiologists. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2020;16(2):175-247. PMID: 31917200 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31917200/.

Richards WO, Khaitan L, Torquati A. Morbid obesity. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 48.

Sullivan S, Edmundowicz SA, Morton JM. Surgical and endoscopic treatment of obesity. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 8.

Updated by: John E. Meilahn, MD, General and Bariatric Surgery, Wyndmoor, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
