Your child has epilepsy. Children with epilepsy have recurrent seizures. A seizure is a sudden brief change in the electrical activity in the brain. Your child may have brief periods of unconsciousness and uncontrollable body movements during seizures. Children with epilepsy can have one or more types of seizures.

Below are some questions you may want to ask your child's health care provider to help you take care of your child's epilepsy.

What safety measures do I need to take at home to keep my child safe during a seizure?

What should I discuss with my child's teachers about epilepsy?

Are there any sports activities that my child should not do? Does my child need to wear a helmet for any type of activities?

Is my child allowed to drive if of driving age?

Does my child need to wear a medical alert bracelet?

Who else should know about my child's epilepsy?

Is it ever OK to leave my child alone?

What do we need to know about my child's seizure medicines?

How often does my child need to see their provider? When does my child need blood tests?

Will I always be able to tell my child is having a seizure?

What are the signs that my child's epilepsy is becoming worse?

What should I do when my child is having a seizure?

What to ask your doctor about epilepsy - child; Seizures - what to ask your doctor - child

Abou-Khalil BW, Gallagher MJ, Macdonald RL. Epilepsies. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 100.

Mikati MA, Tchapyjnikov D, Rathke KM. Seizures in childhood. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 633.

Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
