Germs from a person may be found on any object the person touched or on equipment that was used during the person's care. Some germs can live many weeks on a dry surface.

Germs on any surface can pass to you or another person. Cleaning helps prevent the spread of germs.

Your workplace has policies about how to clean:

Start by wearing the right personal protective equipment (PPE). Your workplace has a policy or guidelines on what to wear. These policies may differ depending on where in the hospital you are cleaning and the type of illness a patient may have had. PPE includes gloves and, when needed, a gown, shoe covers, and a mask or respirator. Always wash your hands before putting gloves on and after taking gloves off.

When you remove bed sheets and towels:

Clean the bed rails, furniture, telephone, call light, door knobs, light switches, bathroom, and all other objects and surfaces in the room. Also clean the floor, including under the furniture. Use the disinfectant or cleaning solution your workplace provides for these purposes.

Carefully put any sharps or needles in the sharps container.

When you clean the floors, change the cleaning liquid every hour. Use a fresh mop every day.

If your workplace does not have a spill response team for cleaning up blood or other bodily fluids, you will need these supplies to clean up spills:

Make sure you are wearing the correct gloves, gown, mask (or respirator), or shoe coverings for the kind of spill you are cleaning up.

Before you start cleaning, mark the area of the spill with tape or barriers so that no one enters the area or slips. Then:

When cleaning up large blood spills, use an approved solution to kill any viruses such as hepatitis.

Always wash your hands after you take off your gloves.

Calfee DP. Prevention and control of health care-associated infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 261.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Disinfection and sterilization guideline. www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-and-sterilization/. Accessed December 9, 2025.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Infection control in health care: an overview. www.cdc.gov/project-firstline/about/. Updated February 7, 2024. Accessed December 9, 2025.

Palmore TN. Infection prevention and control in the health care setting. In: Blaser MJ, Cohen JI, Holland SM, et al, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 304.

Rutala WA, Boyce JM, Weber DJ. Disinfection, sterilization and antisepsis: An overview. Am J Infect Control. 2023;51(11S):A3-A12. PMID: 37890951 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37890951/.

Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
