Explore other ways to connect Canada's food guide to core knowledge and skill subjects. Exposing children to a variety of foods can help them become familiar with these items and provide opportunities for natural conversations about food and eating. Try these additional learning activities to support learning.

Tip: These activities are intended to support children's learning in a variety of settings. They should not be interpreted as curriculum. Visit your province or territory's ministry or department of education for information on curriculum.

Place a bowl with foods, such as vegetables and fruits, for all children to see. Challenge them to use chalk or pastels to draw the foods, while paying particular attention to representing their shape and texture.

Invite children to imagine how this food would be served, such as with herbs and spices. Ask them to use mixed media to decorate and add texture to their drawing, such as:

Use food scraps to regrow food or plants with your group, or modify their colour. For example, you can regrow:

You can also add food dyes to glasses of water and add celery stalks.

Invite children to monitor the growth of their food scraps, or the colour change of the celery stalks as they draw water. Invite them to write down their observations.

Use food items and recipes to explore equations and other mathematics with children. For example:

Invite children to select different regions from around the world. Ask them to explore:

Encourage children to reflect on the different foods available in those regions and how they may have helped shaped the food cultures and traditions.

Challenge children to write a fable about a food item. Ask them to:

Invite children to read their stories in pairs or to the group.

Find pictures of foods that children may have never tried before. Aim for about 10 different items. Make 2 to 3 copies of each item and place them face down around the space.

On chart paper, put a picture of each food item and assign a movement to it. For example:

Children are to move around the space, pick up a food card, and do the movement associated with it. After doing the movement, children can turn the card back over and move to a different card. Modify the movements for your group as required.

Provide students with the Canada's food guide snapshot and explore using the second language to review it.

Invite children to enjoy a snack with a few others from the group, and to engage in conversation about the snapshot using their second language.

More activities for ages 9 to 11

For recipes and more food guide resources visit: Canada.ca/FoodGuide
