The prostate gland often grows larger as men get older. This is called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). An enlarged prostate may cause you problems with urinating.

Below are some questions you may want to ask your health care provider about your prostate.

What is the prostate gland?

Where is it in my body?

What does the prostate gland do?

What causes the prostate gland to enlarge?

Do many other men have prostate problems?

How do I know my problem is not prostate cancer?

What are the symptoms of an enlarged prostate?

Will these symptoms get worse? How quickly?

Can any of these symptoms be harmful or dangerous?

What tests should I have?

How can I treat my symptoms at home?

Is it OK to drink alcohol? How about coffee and other drinks with caffeine?

How much fluid should I drink during the day?

Are there medicines that may make my symptoms worse?

Are there exercises that can help with my symptoms?

What can I do so that I do not wake up at night as much?

I have heard there are different herbs and supplements that may improve my symptoms? Is this true? Are these herbs or supplements safe to use?

Are there different types? How are they different?

Will they make my symptoms go away completely?

Does their benefit wear off over time?

What side effects should I look for?

What should I do if I am having a hard time urinating?

Questions to ask when thinking about having surgery for an enlarged prostate:

What are the different types of surgery that I can have?

What to ask your doctor about enlarged prostate; Benign prostatic hypertrophy - what to ask your doctor; BPH - what to ask your doctor

Capogrosso P, Salonia A, Montorsi F. Evaluation and nonsurgical management of benign prostatic hyperplasia. In: Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 150.

Kaplan SA. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatitis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 114.

Moul JW, Gridley CM. Benign prostatic hyperplasia. In: Kellerman RD, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn's Current Therapy 2025. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:1233-1236.

Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
