Broken bones can be fixed by surgery using metal pins, screws, nails, rods, or plates. These metal pieces hold the bones in place while they heal. Sometimes, the metal pins need to stick out of your skin to hold the broken bone in place.

The metal and the skin around the pin must stay clean to prevent infection. Sometimes, your surgeon may want you to have these metal pins for months to allow the fracture to heal.

In this article, any metal piece that is sticking out of your skin after surgery is called a pin. The area where the pin comes out of your skin is called the pin site. This area includes the pin and the skin around it.

You must keep the pin site clean to prevent infection. If the site becomes infected, the pin may need to be removed. This could delay bone healing, and the infection could make you very sick.

Check your pin site every day for signs of infection, such as:

If you think you have an infection, contact your surgeon right away.

There are different types of pin-cleaning solutions. The two most common solutions are:

Use the solution that your surgeon recommends.

Supplies you will need to clean your pin site include:

Clean your pin site twice a day. Do not put lotion or cream on the area unless your surgeon tells you it is OK.

Your surgeon may have special instructions for cleaning your pin site. But the basic steps are as follows:

For a few days after your surgery, you may wrap your pin site in dry sterile gauze while it heals. After this time, leave the pin site open to air.

If you have an external fixator (a steel bar that may be used for fractures of long bones), clean it with gauze and cotton swabs dipped in your cleaning solution every day.

Most people who have pins can take a shower 10 days after surgery. Ask your surgeon how soon and whether you are allowed to do it.

Broken bone - rod care; Broken bone - nail care; Broken bone - screw care

Green SA, Gordon W. Principles and complications of external skeletal fixation. In: Browner BD, Jupiter JB, Krettek C, Anderson PA, eds. Skeletal Trauma: Basic Science, Management, and Reconstruction. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 8.

Hall JA. External fixation of distal tibial fractures. In: Schemitsch EH, McKee MD, eds. Operative Techniques: Orthopaedic Trauma Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 53.

Kazmers NH, Fragomen AT, Rozbruch SR. Prevention of pin site infection in external fixation: a review of the literature. Strategies Trauma Limb Reconstr. 2016;11(2):75-85. PMID: 27174086 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27174086/.

Whittle AP. General principles of fracture treatment. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds. Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 53.

Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
