Gloves are a type of personal protective equipment (PPE). Other types of PPE are gowns, masks, face shields, protective eyewear, and shoe and head covers.

Gloves create a barrier between germs and your hands. Wearing gloves in the hospital helps prevent the spread of germs.

Wearing gloves helps protect both patients and health care workers from infection.

Gloves help keep your hands clean and lessen your chance of getting germs that can make you sick.

Wear gloves every time you touch blood, bodily fluids, bodily tissues, mucous membranes, or broken skin. You should wear gloves for this sort of contact, even if a patient seems healthy and has no signs of any germs.

Containers of disposable gloves should be available in any room or area where patient care takes place.

Gloves come in different sizes, so make sure you choose the right size for a good fit.

Some cleaning and care procedures require sterile or surgical gloves. Sterile means "free from germs." These gloves come in numbered sizes (5.5 to 9). Know your size ahead of time.

If you will be handling chemicals, check the material safety data sheet to see what kind of gloves you will need.

Do not use oil-based hand creams or lotions unless they are approved for use with latex gloves.

If you have a latex allergy, use non-latex gloves and avoid contact with other products that contain latex.

When you take gloves off, make sure the outsides of the gloves do not touch your bare hands. Follow these steps:

Always use new gloves for each patient. Wash your hands between patients to avoid passing germs.

Infection control - wearing gloves; Patient safety - wearing gloves; Personal protective equipment - wearing gloves; PPE - wearing gloves; Nosocomial infection - wearing gloves; Hospital acquired infection - wearing gloves

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) website. Personal protective equipment. www.cdc.gov/niosh/ppe/. Accessed February 17, 2026.

Degesys NF, Sokolove PE. Standard precautions and infectious exposure management. In: Birnbaumer DM, ed. Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 69.

Palmore TN. Infection prevention and control in the health care setting. In: Blaser MJ, Cohen JI, Holland SM, et al, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 304.

US Food and Drug Administration website. Medical gloves. www.fda.gov/medical-devices/personal-protective-equipment-infection-control/medical-gloves. Updated July 2, 2024. Accessed February 17, 2026.

Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
