"Staph" (pronounced staff) is short for Staphylococcus. Staph is a germ (bacteria) that can cause infections in any part of the body, but most are skin infections. Staph can infect openings in the skin, like scratches, pimples, or skin cysts. Anyone can get a staph infection, especially in hospitals.

Hospital patients can get staph infections of the skin:

Once the staph germ enters the body, it can spread to bones, joints, and the blood. It can also spread to any organ, such as the lungs, heart, or brain.

Staph can also spread from one person to another.

Staph Infections in the Hospital

Staph germs are mostly spread by skin-to-skin contact (touching). Health care providers or even visitors may have staph germs on their body and then spread them to a patient. This can happen when:

Also, a patient may have a staph infection before coming to the hospital. This can occur without the person even being aware of it.

In a few cases, people can get staph infections by touching clothing, sinks, or other objects that have staph germs on them.

One type of staph germ, called methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), is harder to treat. This is because MRSA is not killed by certain antibiotics used to treat ordinary staph germs.

What are Risk Factors for Staph Infection?

Many healthy people normally have staph on their skin. Most of the time, it does not cause an infection or symptoms. This is called being colonized with staph. These people are known as staph carriers. They can spread staph to others. Some people colonized with staph develop an actual staph infection that makes them sick.

Common risk factors for developing a serious staph infection are:

How Do You Know If You Have a Staph Infection?

Any time an area of your skin appears red, swollen, or crusty, a staph infection may be the cause. The only way to know for sure is to have a test called a skin culture. To do the culture, your provider may use a cotton swab to collect a sample from an open wound, skin rash, or skin sore. A sample may also be taken from a wound, blood, sputum (phlegm) or your nose. The sample is sent to the lab for testing.

Preventing Staph Infection in Hospitals

The best way to prevent the spread of staph for everyone is to keep their hands clean. It is important to wash your hands thoroughly. To do this:

Alcohol-based gels may also be used if your hands are not visibly dirty.

Ask visitors to wash their hands before they come into your hospital room. They should also wash their hands when they leave your room.

Health care workers and other hospital staff can prevent staph infection by:

Many hospitals encourage patients to ask their providers if they have washed their hands. As a patient, you have the right to ask.

Calfee DP. Prevention and control of health care-associated infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 261.

Centers for Disease Control and Infection website. Clinical overview of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in healthcare settings. www.cdc.gov/mrsa/hcp/clinical-overview/. Updated June 27, 2025. Accessed December 8, 2025.

Palmore TN. Infection prevention and control in the health care setting. In: Blaser MJ, Cohen JI, Holland SM, et al, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 304.

Que YA, Moreau K, Vandenesch F. Staphylococcus aureus. In: Blaser MJ, Cohen JI, Holland SM, et al, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 199.

Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Drector, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
