Pulmonary hypertension (PAH) is abnormally high blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs. With PAH, the right side of the heart has to work harder than normal.

As the illness gets worse, you will need to do more to take care of yourself. You will also need to make changes in your home and get more help around the house.

Try walking to build up strength:

Ride a stationary bike. Ask your provider or respiratory therapist how long and how hard to ride.

Get stronger even when you are sitting:

Other tips for self-care include:

Make it easier for yourself at home.

In the hospital, you received oxygen treatment. You may need to use oxygen at home. Do not change how much oxygen is flowing without asking your provider.

Have a backup supply of oxygen at home or with you when you go out. Keep the phone number of your oxygen supplier with you at all times. Learn how to use oxygen safely at home.

If you check your oxygen with an oximeter at home and your number often drops below 90%, contact your provider. If you check your oxygen during activity, it should be above or at 90% almost all the time. If not, contact your provider.

Make sure you have enough supply of your medicines. Abruptly stopping them can lead to serious illness.

Your hospital provider may ask you to make a follow-up visit with:

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider if your breathing is:

Also contact your provider if:

Pulmonary hypertension - self-care; Activity - pulmonary hypertension; Preventing infections - pulmonary hypertension; Oxygen - pulmonary hypertension

Lammi MR, Mathai SC. Pulmonary hypertension: general approach. In: Broaddus VC, King TE, Ernst JD, et al, eds. Murray & Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 83.

Maron BA. Pulmonary hypertension. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds. Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 88.

Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
