You have seen your health care provider for erection problems. You may get a partial erection that is insufficient for intercourse or you may be unable to get an erection at all. Or you may prematurely lose the erection during intercourse. If the condition persists, the medical term for this problem is erectile dysfunction (ED).

Erection problems are common in adult men. In fact, almost all men have a problem getting or maintaining an erection at times.

For many men, lifestyle changes can help with ED. For example, alcohol and illegal drugs may make you feel more relaxed. But they can cause ED or make it worse. Avoid illegal drugs, and consider limiting the amount of alcohol you drink.

Smoking and smokeless tobacco can cause narrowing of blood vessels all over the body, including those that supply blood to the penis. Talk to your provider about quitting.

Having ED can make you feel bad about yourself. This can make it even more difficult to seek treatment and enjoy sexual activity.

ED can be a troubling issue for couples because it can be difficult for you or your partner to discuss the problem with each other. Couples who do not openly talk to each other are more likely to have problems with sexual intimacy. Likewise, men who have trouble talking about their feelings may be unable to share their sexual concerns with their partners.

If you have trouble communicating, counseling can be very helpful for you and your partner. Finding a way for both of you to express your feelings and desires, and then work on the issues together, can make a big difference.

Sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra, Staxyn), tadalafil (Cialis), and avanafil (Stendra) are oral medicines prescribed for ED. They help you get an erection only when you are sexually aroused.

Other ED medicines include those that are injected into the penis and tablets that can be inserted into the opening of the urethra. Your provider will teach you how to use these treatments if they are prescribed.

If you have heart disease, talk with your provider before using these medicines. Men who take nitrates for heart disease should not take ED medicines.

Many herbs and dietary supplements are marketed to help sexual performance or desire. None of these remedies have been proven effective for treating ED. Talk to your provider to see if any of these treatments are right for you. Treatment options other than medicines are available if medicines do not work for you. Talk to your provider about these treatments.

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider right away or go to an emergency room if any ED medicine gives you an erection that lasts more than 4 hours. If this problem is not treated, you may suffer lasting damage to your penis.

To end an erection you may try to repeat climax and apply a cold pack to your genitals (wrap the pack in a cloth first). Never go to sleep with an erection.

Anele UA, Burnett AL. Evaluation and management of erectile dysfunction. In: Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 72.

Burnett AL, Nehra A, Breau RH, et al. Erectile dysfunction: AUA guideline. J Urol. 2018;200(3):633-641. PMID: 29746858 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29746858/.

Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male hypogonadism, infertility, and sexual dysfunction. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 216.

Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
