Many cities and states have bike lanes and laws that protect bicycle riders. But riders are still at risk of being hit by cars. Therefore, you need to ride carefully, obey the laws, and watch for other vehicles. Always be prepared to stop or take evasive action.

Obey the rules of the road.

The brain is fragile and easily injured. Even a simple fall can cause brain damage that may leave you with lifelong problems.

When riding a bike, everyone, including adults, should wear helmets. Wear your helmet correctly:

Your local sporting goods store, sports facility, or bike shop can help make sure your helmet fits properly. You can also contact the League of American Bicyclists.

Throwing around bicycle helmets can damage them. If this happens, they will not protect you as well. Be aware that older helmets, passed down from others, may not still offer protection.

Make Sure You Can be Seen at Night

If you ride at night, try to stay on roads that are familiar and brightly lit.

The following equipment, required in some states, will keep you safer:

Having infants in bike seats makes the bike more difficult to manage and harder to stop. Accidents that occur at any speed can injure a young child.

Following some simple rules can help keep you and your child safe.

To be able to ride in a rear mounted bike seat or child trailer, a child must be able to sit without support while wearing a lightweight helmet.

Rear-mounted seats must be securely attached, have spoke guards, and have a high back. A shoulder harness and a lap belt are also needed.

Young children should use bikes with coaster brakes. These are the kind that brake when pedaled backward. With hand brakes, a child's hands should be large enough and strong enough to squeeze the levers.

Make sure bikes are the right size, rather than a size "your child can grow into." Your child should be able to straddle a bike with both feet on the ground. Children cannot handle oversize bikes and are at risk of falling and other accidents.

Even when riding on sidewalks, children need to learn to watch for cars pulling out from driveways and alleys. Also, teach children to watch for wet leaves, gravel, and curves.

Make sure your child is careful about keeping loose pants legs, straps, or shoelaces from getting caught in the spokes of the wheel or bicycle chain. Teach your child never to ride barefoot, or while wearing sandals or flip-flops.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Bicycle safety. www.cdc.gov/pedestrian-bike-safety/about/bicycle-safety.html. Updated April 29, 2024. Accessed June 24, 2025.

HealthyChildren.org website. Bicycle safety for children: myths and facts. www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/at-play/pages/Bicycle-Safety-Myths-And-Facts.aspx. Updated July 14, 2022. Accessed June 24, 2025.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration website. Bicycle safety. www.nhtsa.gov/road-safety/bicycle-safety. Accessed June 24, 2025.

Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
