Most often, you will stay in the hospital for 1 to 2 days after having hip or knee joint replacement surgery. During that time, you will recover from your anesthesia and the surgery. Under some circumstances, a person may go home the same day as the surgery.

Even though your surgeon may talk to your family or friends right after surgery is done, you will still spend 1 to 2 hours after surgery in a recovery room before going to your room. You will likely wake up tired and groggy.

You will have a large dressing (bandage) over your incision (cut) and part of your leg. A small drainage tube may be placed during surgery to help drain blood that collects in your joint after surgery.

You will have an IV (a catheter, or tube, that is inserted into a vein, most often in your arm). You will receive fluids through the IV until you are able to drink on your own. You will slowly resume a normal diet.

You may have a Foley catheter inserted into your bladder to drain urine. Most of the time, it is removed shortly after surgery. You may have some trouble passing your urine after the tube is removed. Make sure you tell your nurse if you feel that your bladder is full. It is helpful if you can walk to the bathroom and urinate in the normal fashion. You may need to have the tube put back in to help drain the bladder if you can't urinate for a while.

Your surgeon will show you how to prevent blood clots.

You may be taught how to use a device called a spirometer and do deep breathing and coughing exercises. Doing these exercises will help prevent pneumonia.

Your surgeon will prescribe pain medicines to control your pain.

You may also be prescribed antibiotics to prevent infection. In most cases, you will get these medicines through an IV while you are still in the hospital.

You Will be Encouraged to Start Moving and Walking

Your surgeon and providers will encourage you to start moving and walking.

You will be helped out of bed to a chair on the day of surgery. You may even try to walk if you feel up to it.

You will work with therapists to get moving again and to learn to take care of yourself.

All of this takes a lot of hard work on your part. But the effort will pay off in the form of a faster recovery and better results.

By the second day after surgery, you will be encouraged to do as much as you can by yourself. This includes going to the bathroom and taking walks in the hallways with help.

After knee replacement, some surgeons recommend using a continuous passive motion machine (CPM) while you are in bed. The CPM bends your knee for you. Over time, the rate and amount of bending can be adjusted to increase them. If you are using this machine, always keep your leg in the CPM when you are in bed. It may help speed your recovery and reduce pain, bleeding, and risk of infection.

You will learn the proper positions for your legs and knees. Make sure you follow these guidelines. Improper positioning can injure your new hip or knee joint.

Getting Ready to go Home

Before you go home, you will need to:

Some people need a short stay in a rehabilitation center or a skilled nursing facility after they leave the hospital and before they go home. During the time you spend here, you will learn how to safely do your daily activities on your own. You will also have time to build strength while you recover from your surgery.

Hip replacement surgery - after - self-care; Knee replacement surgery - after - self-care

Harkess JW, Crockarell JR. Arthroplasty of the hip. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds. Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 3.

Hunter DJ. Osteoarthritis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 241.

Liew JW, Kumar D, Neogi T. Treatment of osteoarthritis. In: Firestein GS, McInnes IB, Koretzky GA, Mikuls TR, Neogi T, O'Dell JR, eds. Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 102.

Mihalko WM. Arthroplasty of the knee. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds. Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 7.

Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
