Restraints in a medical setting are devices that limit a patient's movement. Restraints can help keep a person from getting hurt or doing harm to others, including their caregivers. Because they can cause complications in some circumstances, they are usually used as a last resort.

There are many types of restraints. They can include:

Other ways to restrain a patient include:

Restraints may be used to keep a person in the proper position and prevent movement or falling during surgery or while on a stretcher.

Restraints can also be used to control or prevent harmful behavior.

Sometimes hospital patients who are confused need restraints so that they do not:

Restraints should not cause harm or be used as punishment. Providers should first try other methods to control a patient and ensure safety. Restraints should be used only as a last resort.

Providers in a hospital can use restraints in emergencies or when they are needed for medical care. When restraints are used, they must:

In a hospital, a nurse who has special training in using restraints can begin to use them. A provider must also be told restraints are being used. The provider must then sign a form to allow the continued use of restraints.

Patients who are restrained need special care to make sure they:

Patients who are restrained also need to have their blood flow checked to make sure the restraints are not cutting off their blood flow. They also need to be watched carefully so that the restraints can be removed as soon as the situation is safe.

If you are not happy with how a loved one is being restrained, talk with someone on the medical team.

Restraint use is regulated by national and state agencies. If you want to find out more about restraints, contact The Joint Commission at www.jointcommission.org/en-us. This agency oversees how hospitals are run in the United States.

Joint Commission International website. Is an enclosure bed, side rails, or hand mitts a restraint? www.jointcommission.org/en/knowledge-library/support-center/standards-interpretation/standards-faqs/000001363. Updated April 5, 2024. Accessed June 30, 2026.

Kowalski JM. Physical and chemical restraint. In: Birnbaumer DM, ed. Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 70.

Moore MJ, Heiner JD. The combative and difficult patient. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 185.

Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
