From: Employment and Social Development Canada

What is your organization’s legal name? The legal name is often:

What is the common name of your organization (if it is different from the legal name)?

Do you have a 15-digit CRA business or registration number? If you do, what is it?

You can find your CRA business number on tax-related documents. You may also find it on other written statements from CRA.

To learn more, please visit the CRA website.

You must choose 1 of the options below:

Individuals can not receive funding.

If you chose Not-for-Profit in Question 4, choose 1 of the options below:

If you chose Private in Question 4, choose 1 of the options below:

If you chose Public in Question 4, choose 1 of the options below:

When was your organization founded?

What is the address of your organization? Give a complete address in a format recognized by Canada Post. You can look at the Canada Post website for help.

What is your organization’s telephone number, fax number (if it has one)? What is the email address?

What is the mailing address of your organization (if it differs from above)?

What is your organization’s telephone and fax numbers (if it differs from above)?

To receive this funding you must be one of the following:

If you do not tell us which of the above options apply, you will be screened out.

You must also attest that you are Indigenous-led.

This means that people who self-identify as Indigenous hold 51% of the leadership positions. This must be true at management and governance levels.

If this applies, write: “I am applying on behalf of an organization that is Indigenous-led”.

Finally, tell us about your organization’s main activities. What is your organization’s mandate and what are the goals of your proposed project? You may provide a link to your organization’s website.

Who is the main contact for us?

What is the job title of the person named in Question 23?

What language would your main contact prefer to use with us (English or French)?

Does the address of your contact differ from the address above?

If you answered "different" in Question 26, what is the address of your contact?

What are the telephone and fax numbers of your main contact? Please provide a telephone number where the person can be contacted during business hours.

What is the email address of your main contact person? We will send communications to this address.

If we can’t reach the main contact, who else can we contact? Please provide their full name, telephone number where we can reach them during business hours, and their email address.

This section helps us decide if you can manage and carry out the proposed project.

Indicate the total number of employees you have.

Let us know if there has been a:

Please tell us about any of the above changes that apply.

What you have done in the last 2 years that will help you carry out this project? Tell us about it. You can include past projects and what they achieved. If you have not delivered similar projects in the past, tell us about your ability to do so.

How will you manage the project? Describe the roles of key staff, use of contracted consultants, and contract oversight. Also describe the financial control and oversight measures, roles of the board of directors, partners and others. Don’t forget to describe the oversight committee, which will help to manage the project. The committee must include members from the applicant and partners.

If yes, how much? Use the spaces provided. Here is an example:

Have you set up a plan to pay back the money?

If you answer "yes", your application can continue. But you have to tell us what you owe and how you are paying back the money.

Give a short title that describes your project.

When do you plan on starting and ending your project?

Your project can start as early as November 2022. It can last up to 60 months (up to 5 years), ending no later than March 31st, 2028.

Funding decisions should be made in Fall 2022.

We can only pay for activities that have started after we sign the agreement.

We encourage you to refer to the SMART model:

Describe how your project will:

If your project targets any of the SPF priority sectors, please provide a brief description in this question. The sectors are:

Project activities are the steps you will take to meet your goals. They should be specific, realistic, relevant, and you should be able to measure them.

There should be a clear link between the project activities and the project costs outlined in the project budget.

Your description of project activities should include something in all of these stages.

Please describe what kind of progress you expect to see on activities as the project continues. What milestones will you achieve at these intervals? What client progress do you expect?

How will the project be set-up and how will you recruit staff and participants?

Describe the activities in detail. Be sure to outline the roles of partners for each activity.

Please describe how you will measure the success of your project. We will use this section to monitor your project’s progress.

Please describe what you will do to complete the project by the end-date. You must take into account disposal of any capital assets, and over-payments to the Department. For most projects, this phase should begin by the start of the last quarter.

Close-out occurs when the project has come to an end. It is not complete until the Department has processed all of the required details.

If you plan to continue the project without ESDC funding, please describe in detail what you will do to ensure your project can continue and be sustained in the long-term.

How will you report back to others on the results of the project outlined in question 57? If you decide to do a formal evaluation you can include it as an expense under SPF. In that case, you should include it in your budget to get paid back. If relevant, please describe the details of the formal evaluation here.

You will need to use a Data Collection System to collect, compile, and keep regularly updated, the Personal Information of each participant of the project. You will also need to provide that information to Canada for use in assessing and evaluating both the Program and the Recipient’s activities. The Data Collection System is an eligible expenditure, so please record it in the Budget detail template (PDF format, 47 KB) along with your other expenses.

If approved for funding, you will need to:

With this in mind, please indicate how you will monitor the project over its length. How will you assess it, to know whether the project is on track? Explain how and when you will collect the data needed to measure the results. How you will review and adjust if needed?

Examples of eligible activities for funding under SPF are:

Project results must be specific, concrete and you need to be able to measure them. Use the indicators chosen in Question 58 and set targets for them. At a minimum, you should include:

It is helpful to think of expected results in terms of what you expect your project to deliver (outcomes) and produce (outputs).

Outcomes are the short-term, medium-term and long‑term results that you expect the project to deliver. One objective may have multiple outcomes. Outcomes answer the questions, “how do we know the project is a success?”.

Outputs are direct products or services that you will produce to get the outcomes you want. They answer the question, “what will the project produce?”.

Note: By the end of your project, you must show marked progress towards meeting the expected results of your project.

Your answer to this question must be "yes". Show us that the ones you chose to measure include:

You must include at least 1 indicator for each of your project’s expected results. You should have told us your expected results in Question 57. Indicators must be specific, concrete and you need to be able to measure them.

At minimum, you must include these indicators:

If "yes", give the main address first. Then, add the other addresses.

If you have more than 5 locations, please continue your answer in Appendix A.

If your project involves official language minority communities, you should answer “yes” to this question. Next, follow the steps in the form.

If you answer “No” to this question, it won’t cause your application to be rejected.

SPF partners are organizations that are part of the project and play a specific role contributing to the objectives of the project. Groups that support the project are not the same thing as partners. A supporter endorses a project, while a partner, including the applicant, contributes to the project and plays an active role.

ESDC does not count as a partner for the purposes of SPF.

Partners must provide 25% or more of the total project value (cash or in-kind).

You must tell us about the role of each partner and what they are contributing to the project. You must also tell us how you will use each contribution. Tell us why each partner is relevant for your project. How will they help?

You must also have a plan to include partners on a committee charged with overseeing the project. Please describe this plan.

Have you partnered with an ISET program agreement holder, please answer yes or no. For either answer, please explain. If you answered yes, please outline how the partnership is complementary to achieving project objectives.

You must submit a partnership commitment letter from every partner except the applicant. If the primary partnership is between 2 divisions of the applicant’s own organization, you will need to submit a partnership commitment letter from the division you are partnering with. We would recommend using the template for the letter, but as long as you provide the required information, you don’t need to.

If your project is targeting one of the following sectors, we will award it more points. Select “National” in the application form.

Applicants need to verify if the above Act lists their proposed activities. Please visit the web site to access the list of Regulations Designating Physical Activities.

Please indicate “Yes” or “No”.

If the answer is “No”, no Impact Assessment is needed.

If the answer is “Yes”, then, the applicant must submit the project description to the IAAC for further review. The IAAC will determine if they need to conduct an Impact Assessment based on the project description.

Important: In the latter case, our funding will depend on the results.

A - Anticipated sources of funding

For SPF, partners must provide at least 25% of the total project value. We will award more points if partners are providing more than the 25% minimum. We will also give more points if partners are providing at least 10% of the total project value in cash.

Your project proposal must not request more than $10 million per year from ESDC. It must also not surpass $50 million over the length of the project. If your proposal surpasses either amount, we will not fund your project. ESDC reserves the right to partially fund a proposal.

The combined contributions from all sources must be equal to or less than 100% of eligible costs.

Please include the name of the organizations that will contribute funds and/or in-kind contributions to this project. You should list ESDC as the first source name and list other sources below.

Your partners must commit to their cash and in-kind contributions in writing. For each one, you will need to send us a partnership commitment letter as described in Question 62.

Please include the total amount of funding that parties involved in the project will provide.

In-kind contributions are goods or services that parties give to your project for free. All parties can contribute to the project, including your own. Contributions can include equipment, services or labour that you receive for free. We will recognize in-kind contributions if we can estimate what a person would pay for it.

If you expect any in-kind contributions, tell us how much they are worth.

To be eligible as an in-kind contribution, both of the following must be true:

Indicate if you have confirmed the contributions from other sources.

You must submit signed copies of all Partner Commitment Letters to the Department with your proposal. We will screen out projects with no letters.

Give an estimate of your project’s costs. Also, let us know the general nature of the costs that all sources of funding will cover. Your costs must be eligible, demonstrate good value for money, and support your project activities.

You must use the Budget detail template (PDF format, 47 KB), when you submit your proposal. It is important that you use the same amounts you entered in ‘Part 3 – Funding’.

Outline your project budget using the Budget detail template (PDF format, 47 KB). The total administration costs, including those of third party organizations, should not exceed 15% of the total ESDC contribution.

Eligible project costs may include:

Note: the agreement holder must award all contracts over $25K through a competitive process.

Below are examples of cost breakdowns for budget items:

Give the total planned spending from all sources, including us. The amounts should align with those in ‘Section A: Anticipated sources of funding’.

“Other” means a cash or in-kind contribution from sources other than us.

Check all statements that apply to your planned spending of ESDC’s funding.

In carrying out the project, you may have to buy goods or services you need from contractors. You may also contract out to third parties (outside providers) to carry out part of the project activities.

“Associated businesses or individuals” means:

If “yes”, explain how your project will benefit from buying capital assets.

A capital asset is any single or composite asset that costs more than $5,000 (before taxes). A capital asset is not part of another product. After the project, you will not have used up the asset.

A composite asset is a group of assets that form 1 unit. This unit only works as a whole. A group of assets is a single capital asset if the total cost is more than $5,000 (before taxes).

For example, a composite capital asset could include:

We do not consider 20 chairs, that each cost $300, capital assets. This is because each chair works on its own and each individual chair cost less than $5,000 (before taxes).

Provide a detailed breakdown of your total eligible project costs over the life of the project. Please breakdown your budget by activity and cost category.

An official representative with the authority to submit proposals on behalf of your organization must attest that:

In order to do this, they must:

As this is an attestation, we do not require a signature.

You can also use this section to add information to previous sections of the application. If you do, please record the question number you are adding to.

The information collected in your application will be used, and may be disclosed, for the purposes of assessing the merits of your application. As part of the assessment process, the information may be shared with external consultants, review committee members, officials in other departments, federal, provincial and/or territorial governments or Members of Parliament.

It may also be used and/or disclosed for policy analysis, research, and/or evaluation purposes. In order to conduct these activities, various sources of information under the custody and control of ESDC may be linked. However, these additional uses and/or disclosures of information will not impact your project.

In the event that the application contains personal information, such personal information will be administered in accordance with the Privacy Act and the provisions governing the protection of personal information that are set out in the Department of Employment and Social Development Act. The application is also subject to the Access to Information Act ("ATIA"). The ATIA provides every person with a right of access to information under the control of the department, subject to a limited set of exemptions. Instructions for obtaining access to this information are outlined in the government publication entitled Information about programs and information holdings, which may also be accessed online at any Service Canada Centre.
