Closed reduction is a procedure to set (reduce) a broken bone without surgery. It allows the bone to grow back together with better alignment. It can be done by an orthopedic surgeon (bone doctor), emergency room physician, or a primary care provider who has training and experience doing this procedure.

After the procedure, your broken limb will be placed in a cast or splint.

Healing can take anywhere from 8 to 12 weeks. How quickly you heal will depend on:

Rest your limb (arm or leg) as much as possible. When you are resting, raise your limb above the level of your heart. You can prop it up on pillows, a chair, a footstool, or something else.

Do not place rings on your fingers or toes on the same arm and leg until your health care provider tells you it is OK. Swelling can occur and work its way down causing your finger or toes to be bigger.

You may have some pain the first few days after getting a cast. Using an ice pack can help.

Check with your provider about taking over-the-counter medicines for pain such as:

Your provider may prescribe a stronger medicine if needed.

Until your provider tells you it is OK, do not:

If you have been given crutches to help you walk, use them each time you move about. Do not hop on one leg. You can easily lose your balance and fall, causing more serious injury.

General care guidelines for your cast include:

You can use a special sleeve to cover your cast while you shower. Do not take baths, soak in a hot tub, or go swimming until your provider tells you it is OK.

You will likely have a follow-up visit with your provider 5 days to 2 weeks after your closed reduction. It is important for them to check how the fracture is aligned.

Your provider may want you to start physical therapy or do other gentle movements while you heal. This will help keep your injured limb and other limbs from getting too weak or stiff.

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider if your cast:

Also contact your provider if you have any signs of infection. Some of these are:

See your provider right away or go to the emergency room if:

Also get care right away if you have:

Fracture reduction - closed - aftercare; Cast care

Waddell JP, Wardlaw D, Stevenson IM, McMillan TE, et al. Closed fracture management. In: Browner BD, Jupiter JB, Krettek C, Anderson PA, eds. Skeletal Trauma: Basic Science, Management, and Reconstruction. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 7.

Whittle AP. General principles of fracture treatment. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds. Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 53.

Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
