A do-not-resuscitate order, or DNR order, is a medical order written by a health care provider. It instructs providers not to do CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) if a patient's breathing stops or if the patient's heart stops beating.

Ideally, a DNR order is created, or set up, before an emergency occurs. A DNR order allows you to choose whether or not you want CPR in an emergency. It is specific about CPR. It does not have instructions for other treatments, such as pain medicine, other medicines, or nutrition.

The provider writes the order only after talking about it with the patient (if possible), the health care proxy, or the patient's family.

CPR is the treatment you receive when your heart or breathing stops. It may involve:

If you are near the end of your life or you have an illness that will not improve, you can choose whether you want CPR to be done or not.

These can be hard choices for you and those who are close to you. There is no hard and fast rule about what you may choose.

Think about the issue while you are still able to decide for yourself.

A DNR order may be a part of a hospice care plan. The focus of hospice care is not to prolong life, but to treat symptoms such as pain or shortness of breath, and to maintain comfort.

If you have a DNR order, you always have the right to change your mind and request CPR if necessary.

How is a DNR Order Created?

If you decide you want a DNR order, tell your provider and health care team what you want. Your provider must follow your wishes, or:

Your provider can fill out the form for the DNR order.

If you do change your mind, talk with your provider or health care team right away. Also tell your family and caregivers about your decision. Destroy any documents you have that include the DNR order.

When You are Unable to Make the Decision

Due to illness or injury, you may not be able to state your wishes about CPR. In this case:

If you have not named someone to speak for you, under some circumstances, a family member can agree to a DNR order for you, but only when you are not able to make your own medical decisions.

No code; End-of-life; Do not resuscitate; Do not resuscitate order; DNR; DNR order; Advance care directive - DNR; Health care agent - DNR; Health care proxy - DNR; End-of-life - DNR; Living will - DNR

Arnold RM, Kutner JS. Palliative care. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 3.

National Institute on Aging website. Advance care planning: advance directives for health care. www.nia.nih.gov/health/advance-care-planning/advance-care-planning-advance-directives-health-care. Updated October 31, 2022. Accessed February 20, 2026.

Shreves A, Quest TE. End of life. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap e5.

Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
