A laceration is technically a defect in the skin resulting from tearing, stretching, or shearing forces. In practice however, the term is often used for any cut that goes all the way through the skin. A small cut can be cared for at home. A large cut needs prompt medical attention.

If the cut is minor, a liquid bandage (liquid adhesive) can be used on the cut to close the wound and help stop bleeding.

A liquid bandage is quick to apply. It causes only slight burning when applied. Liquid bandages seal the cut after only 1 application. If the wound is thoroughly cleaned and rinsed first, there is less chance for subsequent infection since the wound is sealed shut.

These products are waterproof, so you can shower or bathe without worry.

The seal lasts for 5 to 10 days. It will fall off naturally after it has done its job. In some cases after the seal falls off, you can reapply more liquid bandage, but only after seeking medical advice from your health care provider. But most minor cuts will be healed at this point.

Using these products may also reduce the size of scars that form at the injury site. Liquid skin adhesives can be found at your local pharmacy.

Applying and Caring for a Liquid Bandage

With clean hands or a clean towel, wash the cut and surrounding area thoroughly with cold water and soap. Dry with a clean towel or gauze pad. Make sure the site is completely dry.

The liquid bandage should not be placed inside the wound; it should be placed on top of the skin, where the cut comes together.

Do not use liquid bandage around the eyes, in the ear or nose, or internally in the mouth. If the liquid bandage is accidentally applied to any of these areas, call your provider, 911 or the local emergency number.

It is OK to bathe after the liquid adhesive has dried. Do not scrub the site. Doing so may loosen the seal or even remove the adhesive completely. It is also OK to wash the site with soap and water daily to keep the area clean and prevent infection. Pat the site dry after washing.

Do not use any other ointments on the site of the cut. This will weaken the bond and slow the healing process.

Do not scratch the site. This will remove the liquid bandage.

Keep the following in mind:

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider right away if:

Skin adhesives; Tissue adhesive; Skin cut - liquid bandage; Wound - liquid bandage

Beard JM, Osborn J. Common office procedures. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds. Textbook of Family Medicine. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 28.

Lammers RL, Scrimshaw LE. Methods of wound closure. In: Birnbaumer DM, ed. Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 35.

Simon BC, Hern HG. Wound management principles. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 50.

Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
