You can submit your application from November 25, 2024, to January 24, 2025, at 3:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time (EST). Closed

To apply by email or mail, download and complete the application form.

Call for Concepts Application Form (PDF, 554 KB)

Email your application to edsc.pssp-psw.esdc@hrsdc-rhdcc.gc.ca by 3:00 pm Eastern Standard Time on January 24, 2025.

If, instead of submitting a concept, you are submitting a full proposal ready for implementation at this stage, use the following naming convention in the subject line of your email: “Ready for implementation full proposal-PSW-Organization Name”.

You will receive a confirmation of receipt by email within 48 hours.

Your application must be postmarked on or before 3:00 pm Eastern Standard Time on January 24, 2025. Your application should be mailed to the address below.

Personal Support Worker Retirement Savings Innovation Program

National Grants & Contributions Delivery Centre (ESDC)

140 Promenade du Portage, Phase IV, 4th Floor

If you submit your application by mail, you will receive an acknowledgment by email within 14 days of its receipt. The acknowledgment will be sent to the email address provided in your application.

Our application form uses PDF form technology. You must have a PDF reader installed to use the form correctly. There are several readers available on the Internet for free that support our form:

If you do not use the recommended readers (Adobe Acrobat 8 or higher or Foxit Reader), ESDC may receive a blank application from you.

To move from one field to the next on the form, hit “Tab”. This ensures that you do not accidently skip over any fields.

Some sections of the form perform calculations based on the amounts you enter and will automatically calculate totals in the appropriate fields. You are responsible for the completeness and accuracy of any information submitted. Please double-check all data you enter.

Submit only 1 copy of your application to ESDC. Submitting multiple copies of the same application or submitting the same application by using various methods will cause longer processing times for your application.

Before submitting your application, make sure to include your:

When you'll get a funding decision

We expect to make decisions for step 1 in winter 2025. If you are successful in step 1 of this process, we will invite you to step 2 to develop a full project proposal. We expect that projects will start as early as January 2026.

Projects may not begin before a funding agreement has been signed by you and ESDC. We will not reimburse any expenses for activities that take place before we sign the Funding Agreement.

Funding will only be provided during Step 2 and not all submitted applications will be selected for funding, as funding is limited. Please note that decisions are final and there is no appeal process.
