If you have had angina, heart surgery, or a heart attack, you may:

Almost everyone with heart problems has these questions and concerns. The most helpful thing you can do is talk to your health care providers, spouse, partner, or friends.

Both you and your provider may be concerned that having sex will bring on a heart attack. Your provider can tell you when it is safe to have sex again.

After a heart attack or heart procedure:

Make sure you know the symptoms that could mean your heart is working too hard. They include:

If you have any of these symptoms during the day, avoid sex and talk to your provider. If you notice these symptoms during (or soon after) having sex, stop the activity. Contact your provider for advice about your symptoms.

After heart surgery or a heart attack, your provider may say it is safe to have sex again.

But your health issues may change the way you feel about or experience sex and close contact with your partner. Besides being worried about having a heart attack during sex, you may feel:

Women may have trouble feeling aroused. Men may have trouble getting or keeping an erection or have other problems.

Your partner may have the same feelings you are having and may be afraid to have sex with you.

If you have any questions or concerns about intimacy, talk to your provider. Your provider can help you find out what is causing the problem and suggest ways to deal with it.

If you are depressed, anxious, or afraid, medicine or talk therapy may help. Classes in lifestyle change, stress management, or therapy may help you, family members, and partners.

If the problem is caused by side effects of medicine you are taking, that medicine may be adjusted, changed, or another medicine may be added.

Men who have trouble getting or keeping an erection may be prescribed a medicine to treat this. These include medicines like sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis).

When to Call the Doctor

If you have new symptoms of heart trouble during sexual activity, stop the activity. Contact your provider for advice. If the symptoms do not go away within 5 to 10 minutes, call 911 or the local emergency number.

American Heart Association website. Sexual activity and heart disease. www.heart.org/en/health-topics/consumer-healthcare/what-is-cardiovascular-disease/sex-and-heart-disease. Updated January 11, 2024. Accessed March 5, 2026.

Marston NA, Morrow DA, De Lemos JA. Stable ischemic heart disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, et al, eds. Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 37.

Seemann, A, Stahler MR, Scott KM. Sexual dysfunction and disability. In: Cifu DX, Bowles AO, Eapen BC, et al, eds. Braddom's Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 23.

Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
