What is a buy now, pay later plan

Many companies offer buy now, pay later (BNPL) plans for the purchase of products and services. With this plan, you’re financing your purchase with credit.

You may purchase something you need without having to pay for it in full right away. You spread the payments over time to fit your budget.

These plans have other names.

There are different payment models available, but they all allow you to pay later.

Companies may offer a promotional rate for purchases made with a buy now, pay later plan. This rate may be as low as 0% interest. However, if you don’t make your payments on time, you’ll usually need to pay fees.

Some companies charge an administration fee to set up the plan. Generally, you pay this fee at the time of your purchase.

Make sure you understand the terms and conditions of your plan.

How buy now, pay later plans work

A buy now, pay later plan generally includes the following agreements:

Your agreement with a financial service provider usually specifies:

Ask the retailer or the financial service provider about anything you don’t understand.

Types of buy now, pay later plans

There are 2 types of plans.

With an equal payment plan, you make regular payments. Financial service providers and retailers also call these “installment payments." The terms of your agreement set out the minimum amount you must pay and at what frequency. You make payments until you pay the full balance.

With a deferred payment plan, you must pay the balance you owe by the due date. There are no set payment amounts. You manage your payment plan.

Payment models of buy now, pay later plans

When you get a buy now, pay later plan, you’re financing your purchase with credit. This means you enter into an agreement with a financial service provider. The financial service provider may run a credit check before approving your application. To finance your purchase, financial service providers offer various payment models.

With a PAD payment plan, the financial service provider automatically debits regular, equal payments from your bank account. You give your banking information to the financial service provider. Usually, your first payment is on the purchase date.

If you don’t have funds in your account to cover the payment, you may need to pay fees.

Learn more about pre-authorized debits.

With this payment model, your financial service provider automatically charges your credit card with regular, equal payments. You give your credit card information to the financial service provider. Some financial service providers charge a processing fee with each payment. This adds to the cost of your original purchase.

Usually, your first payment is on the purchase date. The transaction appears on your credit card statement. It’s your responsibility to pay your credit card on time. Make sure your payment covers the cost of the purchase. This will help you avoid additional fees with your credit card provider.

Some credit card providers don’t allow buy now, pay later transactions. They may block your transaction.

Learn more about credit card fees.

Option on your credit card

Some credit card providers offer a buy now, pay later option for qualifying purchases. Credit card providers may call this option “equal installment payments.” You may be able to have multiple buy now, pay later plans on your credit card.

With this option, the retailer charges the total amount of your purchase to your credit card. Your credit card provider converts your purchase into an installment payment plan. This means they split your purchase into equal payments.

To use this option you must request it with your credit card provider. Check to see if you need to request it before or after your purchase.

With this option, you may benefit from of a promotional interest rate. Promotional interest rates may be as low as 0%.

There’s usually a minimum purchase amount. Credit card providers determine the purchase qualification process.

Read your credit card agreement carefully. Ask your credit card provider about anything you don’t understand.

Some retailers offer credit cards with a buy now, pay later payment option. A financial institution, like a bank, issues the retail credit card. You may be able to only use your card at a specific retailer or set of retailers.

Some retail credit cards come with a promotional interest rate for your buy now, pay later purchase. Promotional interest rates may be as low as 0%.

If you miss a payment, you may lose your promotional interest rate. This is also the case if you don’t pay your balance in full by the due date. For example, the interest rate may go from 0% to 35% if you miss the minimum payment due date. You’ll have to pay a higher interest rate until you pay your balance in full. This might be costly.

Depending on the terms of your plan, a late payment means you’ll pay interest on either:

When you sign up for a retail credit card, you agree to pay any fees associated to the card. This may include an annual fee. Read your credit card agreement carefully.

The buy now, pay later payment amount may appear on your statement as follows:

You may be able to make other credit card purchases using this card. The promotional interest rate may not apply to these other purchases.

A retailer may offer to finance your purchase with a personal loan. They’ll provide you with the loan application.

With this option, you enter into an agreement with a financial institution determined by the retailer. You borrow a fixed amount of money and agree to pay it back over a period. You must pay back the full amount, including any applicable interest and fees.

Learn more about personal loans.

Things to consider before you get a buy now, pay later plan

Before you sign up for a buy now, pay later plan, consider the following:

Before applying for a buy now, pay later plan, compare the pros and cons.

Filing a complaint about your buy now, pay later plan

If you have a complaint about your buy now, pay later plan, contact the plan provider. Depending on your agreement, you may also need to contact the retailer.

Learn what rules apply to retailers and how to file a complaint through your Consumer Affairs office.

Find your provincial or territorial Consumer Affairs office.

All federally regulated financial institutions must have a complaint-handling process in place.

Learn how to file a complaint with your financial institution.

Contact your regulator if your retail credit card provider operates under provincial or territorial regulations.

Find your provincial or territorial regulator.
