A ventilator is a machine that breathes for you or helps you breathe. It is also called a breathing machine or respirator. The ventilator:

How Does Being on a Ventilator Feel?

A person receives medicine to remain comfortable while on a ventilator, especially if they have a breathing tube in their mouth. The medicine may cause people to be too sleepy to open their eyes or stay awake for more than a few minutes.

People cannot talk because of the breathing tube. When they are awake enough to open their eyes and move, they can communicate in writing and sometimes by lip reading.

People on ventilators will have many wires and tubes on them. This may look scary, but these wires and tubes help to carefully monitor them.

Some people may have restraints. These are used to prevent them from pulling out any important tubes and wires.

People are placed on ventilators when they cannot breathe adequately on their own. This may be for any of the following reasons:

Most of the time, a ventilator is needed only for a short time -- hours, days, or weeks. But in some cases, a ventilator is needed for months, years, or indefinitely.

What Kind of Care Does a Person Need When on a Ventilator?

In the hospital, a person on a ventilator is watched closely by their health care team, including providers, nurses, and respiratory therapists.

People who need ventilators for long periods may stay in long-term care facilities. Some people with a tracheostomy may be able to be at home, but they do require a lot of support from family or other healthcare professionals.

People on a ventilator are watched carefully for lung infections. When connected to a ventilator, a person has a hard time coughing out mucus. If mucus collects, the lungs do not get enough oxygen. The mucus can also lead to pneumonia. To get rid of the mucus, a procedure called suctioning is needed. This is done by inserting a small thin tube into the person's mouth or neck opening to vacuum out the mucus.

When the ventilator is used for more than a few days, the person may receive nutrition through tubes into either a vein or their stomach.

Because the person cannot speak, special efforts need to be made to monitor them and provide them with other ways to communicate.

Brochard L, Slutsky AS. Mechanical ventilation. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 91.

Goligher EC, Fan E. Mechanical ventilation. In: Broaddus VC, King TE, Ernst JD, et al, eds. Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 135.

Updated by: Andrew Schriber, MD, FCCP, Specialist in Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Virtua Memorial Hospital, Mount Holly, New Jersey. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
