If you have diabetes, check your blood sugar level as often as instructed by your health care provider. Record the results. This will tell you how well you are managing your diabetes. Checking blood sugar can help you stay on track with your nutrition and activity plans.

The most important reasons to check your blood sugar at home are to:

Check Your Blood Sugar Often

Not everyone with diabetes needs to check their blood sugar every day. Others need to check it many times a day.

Usual times to test your blood sugar are before meals and at bedtime. Your provider may ask you to check your blood sugar 2 hours after a meal or even sometimes in the middle of the night. Ask your provider when you should check your blood sugar. Also ask whether you should consider using a continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) device.

Other times to check your blood sugar may be:

How to Prepare for the Test

Have all test items within reach before starting. Timing is important. Clean the needle prick area with soap and water. Completely dry the skin before pricking. Do not use an alcohol pad or swab to clean the skin. Alcohol is not effective in removing sugar residue from the skin.

How the Test is Done

You can buy a testing kit from a pharmacy without a prescription. Your provider can help you choose the right kit, set up the meter, and teach you how to use it.

To do the test, prick your finger with the needle and place a drop of blood on a special strip. This strip measures how much glucose is in your blood. Some monitors use blood from areas of the body other than the fingers, reducing discomfort. The meter shows your blood sugar results as a number on a digital display. If your vision is poor, talking glucose meters are available so that you don't have to read the numbers.

Be aware that no meter or strip is accurate 100% of the time. If your blood sugar value is unexpectedly high or low, measure again with a new strip. Do not use strips if the container has been left open or if the strip has gotten wet.

Keep a record for yourself and your provider. This will be a big help if you are having problems controlling your diabetes. It will also tell you what you did when you were able to control your diabetes. To get the most help with controlling your blood sugar, record:

Blood sugar meters can store hundreds of readings. Most types of meters can save readings to your computer or smart phone. This makes it easy to look back at your record and see where you may have had problems. Often the pattern of blood sugar changes from one time to another (for example, from bedtime to morning time). Ask your provider about the best way to record this information so they can more easily help you.

Always bring your meter (and CGM device if you use one) when you visit your provider. You and your provider can look at your blood sugar patterns together and make adjustments to your medicines, if needed.

You and your provider should set a target goal for your blood sugar level for different times of the day. If your blood sugar is higher than your goals for 3 straight days and you don't know why, contact your provider or diabetes educator.

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider if your blood sugar is too high or too low and you do not understand why. When your blood sugar is in your target range, you will feel better and your health will be better.

Diabetes - home glucose testing; Diabetes - home blood sugar testing

Ahmann AJ, Riddle MC. Therapeutics of type 2 diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 34.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 5. Facilitating positive health behaviors and well-being to improve health outcomes: standards of care in diabetes-2026. Diabetes Care. 2026;49(Supplement_1):S89-S131. PMID: 41358898 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41358898/.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 6. Glycemic goals, hypoglycemia, and hyperglycemic crises: standards of care in diabetes-2026. Diabetes Care. 2026;49(Supplement_1):S132-S149. PMID: 41358894 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41358894/.

Dhatariya KK, Umpierrez GE, Crandall JP. Diabetes. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 210.

Gillard P, Atkinson MA, Mathieu C. Type 1 diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 35.

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Healthy living with diabetes. www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/healthy-living-with-diabetes. Reviewed October 2023. Accessed March 3, 2026.

Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
