"Screen time" is a term used for activities done in front of a screen, such as watching TV, working on a computer, or playing video games. Screen time is a sedentary activity, meaning you are being physically inactive while sitting down. Very little energy is used during screen time.

Most American children spend about 3 hours a day watching TV. Added together, all types of screen time can total 5 to 7 hours a day.

Too much screen time can:

Screen time increases your child's risk for obesity because:

Computers can help kids with their schoolwork. But surfing the internet, spending too much time on social media, or watching YouTube or Tik-Tok videos is considered unhealthy screen time.

Children under age 2 should have no screen time.

Limit screen time to 1 to 2 hours a day for children age 2 and over.

Despite what ads may say, videos that are aimed at very young children do not improve their development.

How to Decrease Screen Time

Cutting down to 2 hours a day can be hard for some children because TV may be such a large part of their daily routines. But you can help your children by telling them how sedentary activities affect their overall health. Talk to them about things they can do to be healthier.

American Psychological Association. Health advisory on social media use in adolescence. www.apa.org/topics/social-media-internet/health-advisory-adolescent-social-media-use. Accessed April 30, 2025.

Baum RA, Schilling S. Positive parenting and support. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 20.

Gahagan S. Overweight and obesity. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 65.

Lissak G. Adverse physiological and psychological effects of screen time on children and adolescents: Literature review and case study. Environ Res. 2018;164:149-157. PMID: 29499467 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29499467/.

Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
