Medicine safety requires that you get the right medicine, the right dose, by the right route, at the right times. During your hospital stay, your health care team needs to follow many steps to make sure this happens.

Medicine Safety While You're in the Hospital

When you're in the hospital, work with your health care team to ensure that you get the right medicines the right way.

All hospitals have a process in place to make sure you get the right medicines. A mistake could cause a problem for you. The process is as follows:

Most of the prescriptions the pharmacy receives are sent by computer. Electronic prescriptions are easier to read than handwritten prescriptions. These systems have safeguards designed to avoid errors. This means there is less chance of a medicine error with electronic prescriptions.

Your provider can tell your nurse to write down a prescription for you. Then your nurse can send the prescription to the pharmacy. This is called a verbal order. Your nurse should repeat the prescription back to your provider to make sure it is right before sending it to the pharmacy.

Your provider, nurse, and hospital pharmacist will check to make sure any new medicines you receive do not cause a bad reaction with other medicines you are already taking.

The Rights of Medication Administration

The Rights of Medication Administration is a checklist nurses use to make sure you get the right medicine. The rights are as follows:

You can help make sure you get the right medicine the right way during your hospital stay by doing the following:

Medication safety - hospital; Five rights - medication; Medication administration - hospital; Medical errors - medication; Patient safety - medication safety

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Medication safety program. Medication safety and your health. www.cdc.gov/medication-safety/about/index.html. Updated November 18, 2024. Accessed February 23, 2026.

Wachter RM, Shojania KG. Quality, safety, and value. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 10.

Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
