Many different germs, called viruses, cause colds. Symptoms of the common cold include:

The flu is an infection of the nose, throat, and lungs caused by the influenza virus. COVID-19 is an illness that can cause many symptoms similar to a cold. It is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

Below are some questions you may want to ask your child's health care provider to help you take care of your child with a cold or the flu.

What are the symptoms of a cold? What are the symptoms of the flu and COVID-19? How can I tell a cold apart from these illnesses?

Can other people become sick from being around my child? How can I prevent that? What should I do if I have other young children at home? How about somebody who is an older adult?

When will my child start to feel better? When should I worry if my child's symptoms have not gone away?

What should my child eat or drink? How much? How will I know if my child is not drinking enough?

What medicines can I buy at the store to help with my child's symptoms?

Will antibiotics make my child's symptoms go away faster? Are there medicines that can make the flu go away faster?

How can I keep my child from getting a cold or the flu?

What to ask your doctor about colds and the flu - child; Influenza - what to ask your doctor - child; Upper respiratory infection - what to ask your doctor - child; URI - what to ask your doctor - child; Swine flu (H1N1) - what to ask your doctor - child

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Influenza (Flu): about influenza. www.cdc.gov/flu/about/. Updated August 13, 2024. Accessed September 30, 2025.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Influenza (Flu): what to do if you get sick. www.cdc.gov/flu/takingcare/. Updated August 30, 2024. Accessed September 30, 2025.

Cherry JD. The common cold. In: Cherry JD, Kaplan SL, Harrison GJ, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds. Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 7.

Ortiz JR, West TE. Influenza. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds. Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 47.

Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Regional Medical Director of Penn Medicine Primary and Specialty Care, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
