An episiotomy is a minor surgery that widens the opening of the vagina during childbirth. It is a cut to the perineum -- the skin and muscles between the vaginal opening and anus.

There are some risks to having an episiotomy. Because of the risks, episiotomies are not as common as they used to be. The risks include:

Sometimes, an episiotomy can be helpful even with the risks.

Will I Need an Episiotomy?

Many women get through childbirth without tearing the tissue around the vagina on their own, and without needing an episiotomy. In fact, recent studies show that not having an episiotomy is best for most women in labor.

Episiotomies don't heal better than tears. They often take longer to heal since the cut is often deeper than a natural tear. In both cases, the cut or tear must be stitched and properly cared for after childbirth. At times, an episiotomy may be needed to ensure the best outcome for you and your baby such as when:

What Happens if I Need an Episiotomy?

Just before your baby is born and as the head is about to crown, your doctor or midwife will give you a shot to numb the area (if you have not already had an epidural).

Next, a small incision (cut) is made. There are 2 types of cuts: median and mediolateral.

Your doctor or midwife will then deliver the baby through the enlarged opening.

Next, your doctor or midwife will deliver the placenta (afterbirth). Then the cut will be stitched closed.

How can I Avoid an Episiotomy?

You can do things to strengthen your body for labor that may lower your chances of needing an episiotomy.

Keep in mind, even if you do these things, you may still need an episiotomy. Your doctor or midwife will decide if you should have one based on what happens during your labor.

Labor - episiotomy; Vaginal delivery - episiotomy

Baggish MS. Episiotomy. In: Baggish MS, Karram MM, eds. Atlas of Pelvic Anatomy and Gynecologic Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 78.

Kilpatrick SJ, Garrison E, Fairbrother E. Normal labor and delivery. In: Landon MB, Galan HL, Jauniaux ERM, et al, eds. Gabbe's Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 11.

Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor Emeritus, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
