Follow these steps to move a person from their bed to a wheelchair. The technique below assumes the person can stand on at least one leg.

If the person cannot use at least one leg, you will need to use a lift to transfer them.

Think through the steps before you act and get help if you need it. If the person is not able to stand, take small steps, and support their body weight, you should get help.

Make sure any loose rugs are out of the way to prevent slipping. You may want to put non-skid socks or shoes on the person's feet if they need to step onto a slippery surface.

The following steps should be followed:

Getting a Patient Ready to Transfer

Before transferring into the wheelchair, the person must be sitting.

Allow the person to sit for a few moments, in case they feel dizzy when first sitting up.

The following steps should be followed when getting ready to transfer the person:

If you have a gait belt, place it on the person to help you get a grip during the transfer. During the turn, the person can either hold onto you or reach for the wheelchair. They should not wrap their arms around your head or neck.

Stand as close as you can to the person, reach around the chest, and lock your hands behind them or grab the gait belt.

The following steps should be followed:

If the person starts to fall during the transfer, lower them to the nearest flat surface, bed, chair, or floor.

When to Call the Doctor

Contact the person's health care provider if they fall.

Pivot turn; Transfer from bed to wheelchair

Bergman R, De Jesus O. Patient care transfer techniques. [Updated 2022 Oct 17]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 Jan. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK564305. Accessed December 3, 2025.

De Jong MR. Essentials of patient care for the sonographer. In: Hagen-Ansert SL, ed. Textbook of Diagnostic Sonography. 9th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 2.

Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
