High blood sugar is also called high blood glucose, or hyperglycemia.

High blood sugar almost always happens in people who have diabetes. High blood sugar occurs when:

Insulin is a hormone that helps the body move glucose (sugar) from the blood into muscle or fat, where it is stored for later use when energy is needed.

Sometimes high blood sugar occurs due to stress from surgery, infection, trauma, or medicines. After the stress is over, blood sugar returns to normal.

Symptoms of High Blood Sugar

Symptoms of a high blood sugar can include:

You may have other, more serious symptoms if your blood sugar becomes very high or remains high for a long time. Over time, high blood sugar weakens your immune system and makes it more likely for you to get infections.

What to Think About When Your Blood Sugar is High

High blood sugar can harm you. If your blood sugar is high, you need to know how to bring it down. If you have diabetes, here are some questions to ask yourself when your blood sugar is high:

Are you taking your diabetes medicines correctly?

To prevent high blood sugar, you will need to:

You and your provider will:

If you have type 2 diabetes and your blood sugar is higher than your goals over 3 days and you don't know why, check your urine for ketones. If you have ketones, contact your provider or seek emergency medical care.

If you have type 1 diabetes and your blood sugar is higher than your goals over 6 hours and you don't know why, check your urine for ketones. If you have ketones, contact your provider or seek emergency medical care.

When to Call the Doctor

Contact your provider if your blood sugar is too high or too low and you do not understand why. When your blood sugar is in your target range, you will feel better and your health will be better.

Hyperglycemia - self care; High blood glucose - self care; Diabetes - high blood sugar

Ahmann AJ, Riddle MC. Therapeutics of type 2 diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 34.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 5. Facilitating positive health behaviors and well-being to improve health outcomes: standards of care in diabetes-2026. Diabetes Care. 2026;49(Supplement_1):S89-S131. PMID: 41358898 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41358898/.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 6. Glycemic goals, hypoglycemia, and hyperglycemic crises: standards of care in diabetes-2026. Diabetes Care. 2026;49(Supplement_1):S132-S149. PMID: 41358894 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41358894/.

Dhatariya KK, Umpierrez GE, Crandall JP. Diabetes. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 210.

Gillard P, Atkinson MA, Mathieu C. Type 1 diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 35.

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Healthy living with diabetes. www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/healthy-living-with-diabetes. Reviewed October 2023. Accessed March 3, 2026.

Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
