The Call for Proposals has been extended to January 22, 2024 for all applicants.

You can apply from November 20, 2023 to January 22, 2024 at 11:59 p.m., Pacific Standard Time (PST).

Application period: Closed on January 22, 2024 at 11:59 p.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST)

Use the Grants and Contributions Online Services (GCOS) to apply.

If you do not have a GCOS account, create one as soon as possible. You can apply for funding as soon as you have registered for a GCOS account. Please note that after you have submitted your application, you will need to finalize your GCOS account in order to become a fully registered user.

GCOS allows you to apply and track multiple applications online. You can check your application status, sign agreements, manage, submit documents and review past projects submitted through GCOS.

To apply through the GCOS system, you will need to create a GCOS account the first time you use the system. We strongly encourage you to start the one-time GCOS account creation process as soon as possible.

When you submit your application through GCOS, you will receive an acknowledgment immediately and a tracking number.

While we recommend GCOS as the most efficient application method, you can also apply using one of the following options:

To apply by email or mail, download and complete the application form (EMP5523).

Email your application at EDSC.ODD2030-2030SDG.ESDC@hrsdc-rhdcc.gc.ca by 11:59 p.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST) on January 22, 2024.

Your application must be postmarked on or before 11:59 p.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST) on January 22, 2024. Print, sign, and mail the documents to the address below. Note additional administrative delays might apply.

Sustainable Development Goals Funding Program submissions Coordination Unit Mailstop 402 National Grants and Contributions Delivery Centre (ESDC) 140 Promenade du Portage Phase IV 4th Floor Gatineau QC K1A 0J9

If you submit your application by mail, you will receive an acknowledgment by email within 14 days of its receipt. The acknowledgment will be sent to the email address provided in your application.

Our application form uses PDF form technology. You must have a PDF reader installed to use the form correctly. There are several readers available on the Internet for free that support our form:

If you do not use the recommended readers (Adobe Acrobat 8 or higher or Foxit Reader), ESDC may receive a blank application from you.

To move from one field to the next on the form, hit “Tab”. This ensures that you do not accidently skip over any fields.

Some sections of the form perform calculations based on the amounts you enter and will automatically calculate totals in the appropriate fields. You are responsible for the completeness and accuracy of any information submitted. Please double-check all data you enter.

Submit only one copy of your application to ESDC. Submitting multiple copies of the same application or submitting the same application by using various methods will cause longer processing times for your application.

When you'll get a funding decision

We expect to make funding decisions in Summer 2024.

You should not start your project until you receive approval from us, as you will not be reimbursed for expenditures incurred before we approve a project and your project may no longer be eligible.

If you apply through GCOS, you will be able to track the status of your application throughout the process.

Not all submitted applications will be selected for funding, as funding is limited. Please note that decisions are final and there is no appeal process.
