Smoke alarms or detectors work even when you cannot smell smoke. Tips for proper use include:

Using a fire extinguisher can put out a small fire to keep it from getting out of control. Tips for use include:

Fires can be loud, burn fast, and produce a lot of smoke. It is a good idea for everyone to know how to get out of their home quickly if one occurs.

Set up fire escape routes from every room in your house. It is best to have 2 ways to get out of each room, since one of the ways may be blocked by smoke or fire. Have twice-a-year fire drills to practice escaping. Have a nearby family meeting point for after escaping the house.

Teach family members what to do in case of a fire.

Teach children about fires. Explain how they are accidentally started and how to prevent them. Children should understand the following:

Children's sleepwear should be snug-fitting and specifically labeled as flame-resistant. Using other clothing, including loose-fitting garments, increases the risk for severe burns if these items catch fire.

Do not allow children to handle or play with fireworks. Many places in the United States do not permit lighting fireworks in residential areas. Go to public displays if your family wants to enjoy fireworks.

If oxygen therapy is being used in your home, teach everyone in the family about oxygen safety to prevent fires.

HealthyChildren.org website. Fire safety: protecting your family from a home fire. www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/all-around/pages/Fire-Safety.aspx. Updated March 24, 2023. Accessed June 17, 2025.

National Fire Protection Association website. Home fire safety. www.nfpa.org/education-and-research/home-fire-safety. Accessed June 17, 2025.

Ready.gov website. Home fires. www.ready.gov/home-fires. Updated February 7, 2025. Accessed June 17, 2025.

US Consumer Product Safety Commission website. Fireworks injuries & deaths 2023 report. www.cpsc.gov/Safety-Education/Safety-Education-Centers/Fireworks. Accessed June 17, 2025.

Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
