To help prevent reinjuring your back at work, or hurting it in the first place, follow the tips below. Learn how to lift the right way and make changes at work, if needed.

Tips to Help Prevent Back Pain When You Return to Work

Exercise helps to prevent future back pain:

If you are overweight, ask your health care provider about ways you can lose some weight. Carrying around extra weight adds stress to your back no matter what kind of work you do.

Long car rides and getting in and out of the car can be hard on your back. If you have a long commute to work, consider some of these changes:

Know how much you can safely lift. Think about how much you have lifted in the past and how easy or hard that was. If an object seems too heavy or awkward, get help to move or lift it.

If your work requires you to do lifting that may not be safe for your back, talk with your boss. Try to find out the most weight you should have to lift. You may need to meet with a physical therapist or occupational therapist to learn how to safely lift this amount of weight.

Follow these steps when you bend and lift to help prevent back pain and injury:

Some providers recommend using a back brace to help support the spine. A brace may help prevent injuries for workers who have to lift heavy objects. But, using a brace too much can allow the core muscles that support your back to weaken, making back pain problems worse.

If your back pain is worse at work, it may be that your work station is not set up correctly.

If your work involves physical activity, review the needed motions and activities with your physical therapist. Your therapist may be able to suggest helpful changes. Also, ask about exercises or stretches for the muscles you use most during work.

Avoid standing for long periods. If you must stand at work, try resting one foot on a stool, then the other foot. Keep switching off during the day.

Take medicines as needed. Let your boss or supervisor know if you need to take medicines that make you sleepy, such as narcotic pain relievers and muscle relaxant medicines.

Nonspecific back pain - work; Backache - work; Lumbar pain - work; Pain - back - chronic; Low back pain - work; Lumbago - work

Barry HC. Exercise is the only intervention to provide long-term improvement in patients with chronic low back pain. Am Fam Physician. 2021;103(11):696-697. PMID: 34060781 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34060781/.

Becker BA, Childress MA. Nonspecific low back pain and return to work. Am Fam Physician. 2019;100(11):697-703. PMID: 31790184 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31790184/.

Dixit R. Low back pain. In: Firestein GS, McInnes IB, Koretzky GA, Mikuls TR, Neogi T, O'Dell JR, eds. Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 47.

El Abd OH, Amadera JED. Low back strain or sprain. In: Frontera WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds. Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: Musculoskeletal Disorders, Pain, and Rehabilitation. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 48.

Farley T, Stokke J, Goyal K, DeMicco R. Chronic low back pain: history, symptoms, pain mechanisms, and treatment. Life (Basel). 2024;14(7):812. pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39063567/.

Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
